
    <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
          <title>The Edogawa Rampo Reader</title>
          <author>Edogawa Rampo</author>
        </titleStmt>
        <publicationStmt>
          <date>2008-12-22T23:00:00+00:00</date>
        </publicationStmt> 
      </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    
<p>The Edogawa Rampo Reader</p>
<p>Edited and Translated by Seth Jacobowitz</p>
<p>Preface by Tatsumi Takayuki</p>
<p>Kurodahan Press</p>
<p>Contents</p>
<p> Preface: Prescriptions for Rampomania</p>
<p>	Tatsumi Takayuki</p>
<p> Translator’s Introduction</p>
<p>	Seth Jacobowitz</p>
<p>The Edogawa Rampo Reader</p>
<p>The Stories</p>
<p> The Daydream</p>
<p> The Martian Canals</p>
<p> The Appearance of Osei</p>
<p> Poison Weeds</p>
<p> The Stalker in the Attic</p>
<p> The Air Raid Shelter</p>
<p>	Doctor Mera’s Mysterious Crimes</p>
<p> The Dancing Dwarf</p>
<p>The Essays</p>
<p> The Horrors of Film</p>
<p>	Spectral Voices</p>
<p> A Passion for Lenses</p>
<p> The Phantom Lord</p>
<p> My Love for the Printed Word</p>
<p> Confessions of Rampo</p>
<p> Fingerprint Novels of the Meiji Era</p>
<p> Dickens and Poe</p>
<p> An Eccentric Idea</p>
<p> A Desire for Transformation</p>
<p>Notes</p>
<p> Contributors</p>
<p>Copyright Information</p>
<p>Prescriptions for Rampomania</p>
<p>Tatsumi Takayuki · Keio University</p>
<p>Following fast on the heels of talented film director Satō Shimako’s new film, K-20, which was completed in late 2008, the publication of this volume makes official a contemporary revival of Edogawa Rampo (1894–1965). Satō’s film features Kaneshiro Takeshi as the latest version of Kaijin-Nijūmensō (The Phantom with Twenty Faces), the great villain Rampo created in 1936 as the nemesis of Akechi Kogorō, his well-known detective hero. Satō’s creative visualization in the steampunkish alternate history of Rampo’s famous phantom recalls such Gothic precursors as the Phantom of the Opera, Zorro, and Batman. We should not forget, though, that Rampo’s phantom originally served as the Japanese version of Maurice Leblanc’s Arsène Lupin, the gentleman-thief, while Akechi functioned as the Japanese version of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes, the master detective. The superbly intellectual battle between a wonderful thief and a ratiocinative genius captured the postwar Japanese popular imagination. Indeed, even today we can see this kind of battle in the manga-based film Death Note (2006), which features a rivalry between Yagami Light, the anti-hero, and L, the detective. Director Satō takes this rivalry a step further in her version of the Phantom, which was inspired by award-winning playwright Kitamura Sō’s original novel Kaijin-Nijūmensō Den (A Portrait of The Phantom with Twenty Faces as a Young Man, originally published in 1989 [Tokyo: Shinchōsha, now available from Shōgakukan, 2008]). Here, Kitamura radically expands the Phantom’s past career as acrobat “Endō Heikichi”, a star player in the Grand Circus Rampo mentioned in Saacasu no Kaijin (The Phantom in the Circus, 1957), and describes in detail how the Phantom makes up his mind to become the greatest burglar of fine art, and also how the Phantom’s disciple succeeds him in name and reputation. Satō further develops Kitamura’s version of the villain and tactfully incorporates into the scenario a super weapon invented by Croatian scientific genius Nikola Tesla, the nemesis of Thomas Alva Edison, whom Rampo seems to have deeply admired as seen in his last novel Kaijin Nikora (Nikola the Phantom, 1963).</p>
<p>Even before he created this mysterious character, Rampo already had a wide audience as a popular detective writer with bizarre tastes. Since his debut in 1923 with “Nisen Dōka” (The Two-Sen Copper Coin), he had published such masterpieces as “Yaneura no Sanposha” (The Stalker in the Attic, 1925), “Ningen Isu” (The Human Chair, 1925), “Panorama-to Kidan” (The Strange Tale of Panorama Island, 1926), Injū (Beast in the Shadows, 1928), Mushi (Crawling Bugs, 1929), Kotō no Oni (The Demon of the Desert Isle, 1929), “Oshie to Tabisuru Otoko” (The Traveler with the Pasted Rag Picture, 1929), and Kurotokage (The Black Lizard, 1934). Rampo’s first phase, in the late Taishō period, loosely corresponds with the Jazz Age in the United States, a time when Lost Generation writers were busy producing what are now recognized as great works of Modernism. And then Black Tuesday hit on October 29, 1929 in the United States, leading to the global Great Depression, while the early Shōwa period in 1930s Japan saw stronger pushes in the directions of imperialism and colonialism. It was a highly risky time for editors to publish new works by the popular but weird writer infamous for his “ero-guro nonsense.” Just as the imperialist, suffocating milieu of the 1930s made the rivalry between the detective and the phantom seem more dangerous and exciting, the conservative and neo-liberalist currents that similarly oppress our times make the revival of Rampo, especially these Gothic recreations of the Phantom, even more sensational and invigorating.</p>
<p>Rampo’s publication of the first installment of the Phantom in the January 1936 issue of Shōnen Kurabu (Boys’ Club) was soon followed by the 2.26 Incident, a series of terrorist attacks by a group of young radical army officers against the Prime Minister’s residence and other buildings in Tokyo that also resulted in the murders of the Home Minister, the Finance Minister, and the Army Inspector General of Military Training. The suppression of this revolt took three days, but when it was over it helped to justify tighter military rule and emboldened imperialist voices in the Japanese government. The editors of Shōnen Kurabu were indeed cautious about encouraging Rampo to write juvenile fiction. But fear was greater than real danger in this case. Once the first installment of the series – a showcase for the battle of wits between the master detective with his “Shōnen-Tanteidan” (a team of boy detectives) and the ingenious thief whose distinctive strength lay in his rich and various techniques of disguise – appeared in Shōnen Kurabu, it immediately drew a huge audience, and ended up with a circulation exceeding 750,000. The Kaijin-Nijūmensō series has maintained an audience ever since; even in the postwar years, for instance, my friends and I enjoyed watching the TV series Shōnen-Tanteidan that ran on Fuji TV beginning in 1960. </p>
<p>Note that Rampo himself never explicitly revealed the identity of the Phantom, although he did drop a number of (sometimes contradictory) clues, refusing to satisfy reader curiosity. As I mentioned above, all we know is that the Phantom used to be known as a famous acrobat “Endō Heikichi.” Of course, we must acknowledge the power of Rampo’s paradox, one where nothing less than a never-ending metamorphosis could best constitute the fascinating identity of the Phantom. And yet, as the Phantom carries out his ceaseless masquerades, we cannot but desire just as ceaselessly to unmask his identity somehow. Which is why Satō joins forces with Kitamura to write the missing pages of the Phantom’s biography, to satisfy the secret desire of so many Rampo fans. </p>
<p>Over the past two decades Rampo has inspired numerous writers and artists to produce their own interpretations of his works. As with Satō Shimako, these projects have not been limited to print media: film director Okuyama Kazuyoshi’s 1994 meta-theatrical film, RAMPO ; playwright Sakate Yōji’s 2002 avant-pop drama, Yaneura (The Attic) based upon “Stalker in the Attic”; and Czech artist Jan Svankmajer’s 2007 series of illustrations based upon Ningen Isu (The Human Chair). It strikes me that this new century’s Gothic sensibility appeals to so many young social misfits, wrist cutters, Otaku, cos-players, Neets, and Internet Café refugees who have emerged in response to the world’s post-9.11 conservative and militaristic environment. These diverse readers keep the erotic and grotesque and even nonsensical aesthetics (ero-guro nonsense) of Edogawa Rampo alive in order to mirror our own reality studio. In recent years, North American Japanologists, together with Japanese scholars and critics, have held Rampo conferences in Chicago (March 2001), New York (April 2007), and Kyoto (December 2007). This Rampo revival invites us to reconsider the ways his works act as a kind of magic mirror reflecting the multiplex of our contemporary culture and its subcultures, across the genres and movements of detective fiction, modernism and postmodernism, gender politics, and post-colonial theory. </p>
<p>We should note that our Rampo revival coincides with bicentennial celebrations of Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849). Poe exemplified American Romanticism, while Rampo survived Japanese Modernism. As is well known, the five ideographs for “Edogawa Rampo” ( 江戸川乱歩 ) were carefully selected to mimic the pronunciation of “Edgar Allan Poe,” but in Japanese they rather decadently suggest one “staggering drunkenly along the Edo River.” As Mark Silver pointed out in his brilliant study of the transpacific map of misreading in The Purloined Letters: Cultural Borrowing and Japanese Crime Literature, 1868–1937 (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2008), the signifier “Edogawa Rampo” evokes “not only an image that is wholly removed from the usual associations it has in English” but also “the long-standing tradition among Japanese literati of devising such clever, self-deprecating pen names” (p. 133). Silver’s theoretical revision of Harold Bloom and Fredric Jameson goes so far as to assume that Rampo’s borrowing embraces “the possibility of parody or pastiche, or even self-parody” (p. 134). </p>
<p>From childhood on, Rampo had imbibed the best of western popular fiction: he was born in 1894 as the first son of a family with samurai ancestors in Nabari, Mie Prefecture, and early influenced by his mother’s addiction to bestselling writer Kuroiwa Ruikō. Kuroiwa translated and skillfully adapted many foreign, especially French, popular novels. In 1914, as a student of economics at Waseda University in Tokyo, Rampo first encountered and seriously read Anglo-American detective stories by Poe, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, and G.K. Chesterton, which fatefully determined his literary tastes. Rampo would go on to found modern Japanese detective fiction, and in doing so, pay homage to, and even surpass at times, the original works of his foreign and Japanese literary precursors. Rampo’s very first work gives us a gentleman-thief reminiscent of Lupin, the prototype for the later Phantom. This first published story, “Nisen Dōka” also succeeded in further complicating the cryptogrammic tradition that Poe, the father of world detective fiction, had inaugurated with “The Gold Bug” (1843). While it is true that Poe’s arabesque, grotesque, and ratiocinative tales exerted great influence upon Rampo’s ero-guro nonsense detective fiction, it is also true that Rampo’s powerful and creative misreadings of his precursor compel us today to reread the earlier tradition through the prism of his modern re-creations. So even though Poe fathered the genre of detective fiction, it was not until the twentieth century that it was truly established with an audience of its own and recognized on its own terms. According to Kasai Kiyoshi, a major detective fictionist and leading critic, the rise and popularity of the genre of detective fiction in the early twentieth century owes much to World War I; after all, it was this war’s mass slaughter with so many anonymous deaths that reminded people to mark the significance of every individual’s death (Tantei Shōsetsu Ron [A History of Japanese Detective Fiction], 2 vols, Tokyo: Tokyo Sōgensha, 1998). Similarly, we find not only Romantic and individualistic tendencies within Modernist works of impersonality, but also see anew how Modernist elements operate within hardcore Romantic writings. </p>
<p>Such paradoxes of literary history return me now to Sakate Yōji’s masterpiece, Yaneura, mentioned above. His experimental drama conjures up a heritage of pre-existentialist Romantic fables such as Nathaniel Hawthorne’s short story about a recluse, “Wakefield” (1837), Herman Melville’s novella about social withdrawal, “Bartleby, the Scrivener” (1853), and Edgar Allan Poe’s tale of an anonymous city stroller, “The Man of the Crowd” (1840). This last work undoubtedly influenced Rampo’s “Yaneura no Samposha” (Stalker in the Attic), translated for the first time into English in the present volume. Poe’s “The Man of the Crowd” features an early version of Walter Benjamin’s flâneur, an urban stroller Rampo wove into so many narratives, from the attic stroller Gōda Saburō to detective Akechi Kogorō. Is it not a little ironic that after Poe created the antebellum American literary tradition of strolling in New York City (disguised in the story as London), the past century and a half of transpacific negotiation among American and Japanese writers – especially Poe, Rampo, Abe Kōbō, Paul Auster, and Murakami Haruki – made possible the New York premier of Sakate Yōji’s The Attic, which takes up anew the appeal of anonymity for today’s dislocated and migratory audiences. Such a literary and cultural genealogy makes clear that city strolling has become very closely intertwined in our modern imagination with voyeuristic and alienated pleasures, including attic stalking.</p>
<p> Perhaps we can say that Rampo clearly saw the limits of Modernism in his modern times, as Hirano Yoshihiko points out in his recent comparative study Hofuman to Rampo: Ningyō to Kōgaku Kikai no Erosu (Hoffmann and Rampo: Dolls and the Erotics of Optical Instruments; Tokyo: Misuzu Publishers, 2007). After all, Rampo’s “Stalker in the Attic” features the pessimistic anti-hero Saburō as an Otaku-like avid reader of crime narratives, not unlike tales by Hoffmann and Poe (pp. 146–147) yet already anticipating postmodern revisions as well. And we should not forget how Meiji anthropologist Yanagita Kunio inspired Rampo to devise strategies for overcoming not only the West’s modernity but also Japan’s national trauma caused by it. Without the precedent of Rampo’s innovations both ahead of and beyond his own times, Sakate could not have constructed his own postmodern strategy of misreading his precursors so creatively and anachronistically. </p>
<p>Jan Svankmajer is so deeply addicted to Poe as to have produced films such as “The Fall of the House of Usher,” “The Pit and the Pendulum,” and “Lunacy” (based upon “The System of Doctor Tarr and Professor Fether”). He pointed out in his preface to the art book The Human Chair (Tokyo: Esquire Magazine Japan, 2007) that every country has its own Poe: Villiers de L’Isle-Adam in France, Gothic Romancers in England, and Rampo in Japan. Allow me to second his comment, pointing out that it is through the radical and global misreading of Rampo that we can see through to the heart of what is going on in our hyper-Gothic age on this alien planet. In this sense, the latest Kabuki rendition of Rampo’s novel Ningen-Hyō (The Human Panther, 1935) as Edo-no-Yami, Ayashi-no-Kagizume (November 3–26, 2008 at the National Theater, Tokyo), as re-interpreted and performed by Kabuki virtuosi Ichikawa Somegorō (as the human panther) and Matsumoto Kōshirō (as the detective Akechi), will help us comprehend the creatively anachronistic and radically globalist revival of Modernist discourses as represented by Rampo. I am sure that this ambitious new anthology will encourage you to open the door and step into deep layers of literary history as well as tap into the hardcore of our own everyday life. </p>
<p>October 31, 2008</p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p>"Side-show Houses in Asakusa Park", April 1911Reproduced with the permissions of the National Diet Library</p>
<p>Translator’s Introduction</p>
<p>Seth Jacobowitz</p>
<p>Few authors in the annals of Japanese literature have enjoyed the iconic status of Edogawa Rampo, the pen-name of Hirai Tarō (1894–1965).1 Beginning with the code-breaking mystery story “Nisen dōka” (The Two-Sen Copper Coin) in 1923, Rampo received popular and critical acclaim for a rapid succession of short stories and novels that not only inaugurated a new genre of detective fiction, but also helped to articulate the cultural logic of “erotic, grotesque, nonsense” (ero-guro-nansensu) in the interwar period. At a time when new forms of mass media, mass culture and the avant-garde were ascendant, Rampo invigorated the literary scene with his startling explorations of Japanese modernity: the lure of secret codes, fetishes, and illicit or prohibited desires; a fascination with cinema and visual spectacles; the psychology of leisure, boredom, and thrill-seeking; and a seemingly inexhaustible wanderlust for the labyrinthine back alleys and sunlit boulevards of the imperial metropolis Tokyo. </p>
<p>He has been a household name in Japan ever since. Paperback editions and multi-volume sets of his collected works are widely and avidly read. Since 1954 the Edogawa Rampo Prize has continued his legacy as an annual award to up-and-coming writers of Japanese detective fiction. Meanwhile, Rampo retrospectives and the rich trove of historical materials associated with his career are a sure-fire way to boost sales for magazines and, on at least one occasion, a major department store.2 In addition to a considerable filmography of over two dozen commercial and art cinema adaptations, including in the inimitable 1970s genre of “Roman Porno,” 3 a steady stream of movies, television specials, manga, and other remakes have reconfirmed his significance. As Tatsumi Takayuki puts it in his preface, Rampo occupies the center (or hardcore) of contemporary Japanese visual culture. It is therefore all the more imperative that his oeuvre becomes known to a wider audience outside Japan.</p>
<p>For the better part of a half century, the only English translations of Edogawa Rampo were a slim volume of nine short stories entitled Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination, the painstaking product of Rampo’s collaboration with translator James B. Harris, published in 1956.4 I discovered this book with its distinctive, poison-green cover on my older brother’s bookshelf when I was in junior high school and devoured it with lurid interest. How it got there remains a mystery, but its impact was immediate and unforgettable. I would like to think my precocious encounter with Rampo was perhaps not so different from generations of Japanese readers, from those who came across his stories in the pages of literary magazines such as Shin seinen (New Youth) in the 1920s to postwar readers weaned on his Shōnen tantei dan (Boy Detectives’ Club) series for children before progressing to headier works. But as Rampo relates in his essay “Katsuji to boku to” (My Love for the Printed Word, 1937), he, too, was initiated into the clandestine pleasures of reading by poking around in his father’s study from an early age.</p>
<p>It would be overstating the case to claim Rampo went unnoticed in the West. Along with Japanese Tales, which has gone through more than fourteen printings, Rampo was bolstered by Ellery Queen’s mention of him in both Queen’s Quorum (1951) and the introduction to the mystery anthology Ellery Queen’s Japanese Golden Dozen (1978). Consequently Rampo’s reputation never entirely dimmed for the cognoscenti among international detective fiction readers.5 It is, however, regrettable that similar efforts were not made in Anglophone studies of modern Japanese literature, where Rampo was routinely bypassed in favor of more belletristic contemporaries such as Kawabata Yasunari, Tanizaki Junichirō, Satō Haruo, and Akutagawa Ryūnosuke. Indeed, it is only amidst renewed critical appreciation for the modernist, cinematic, and detective fiction-like tendencies of those writers in the past decade that English-language translation and studies of Rampo have experienced something of a renaissance. In 2006 the first new volume of translation in English was published: the novellas The Black Lizard and Beast in the Shadows (Fukuoka: Kurodahan Press). In 2008 two monographs dedicated to Japanese detective fiction and an anthology of Japanese modernist fiction in translation with three Rampo short stories have further broken the long silence.6 </p>
<p>In assembling this anthology, it was my intention to capture the many facets, or, as befits the author of Kaijin nijū mensō (The Mystery Man with Twenty Faces), the many “faces” of Rampo’s oeuvre. The selection process is never easy with an author of his immense productivity. The most up-to-date Edogawa Rampo zenshū, (Collected Works of Edogawa Rampo; Tokyo: Kōbunsha, 2003–6) runs to thirty substantial volumes. By no means exhaustive, the eight short stories and ten essays included here represent different stages of his career while nevertheless striving to convey recurring motifs and methods. It is my hope The Edogawa Rampo Reader will contribute to a more complete picture of Edogawa Rampo as novelist, essayist, and keen observer of modern life in Japan. </p>
<p>I. Poe and Rampo </p>
<p>It has become standard practice (some might say cliché) when introducing Rampo to signal his debts to Edgar Allan Poe, from the symbolism of his pseudonym to the conventions of Anglo-American detective fiction that Rampo and subsequent scholars alike have cited in his creative development. To recount an oft-cited anecdote, Ellery Queen encouraged the Anglophone reader to say aloud the name “Edogawa Rampo” in an almost hypnotic repetition in order to bring forth its uncanny phonetic association with Edgar Allan Poe. This subliminal resonance was amplified by the book title Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination, an obvious nod to the many collections of Poe’s works published under the title Tales of Mystery and Imagination. It was a deliberate effort to position Rampo as an exotic Japanese doppelgänger of Poe at a time when such a strategy would be most effective in reaching a mainstream English audience. </p>
<p>Yet the affinity of names goes much further than is typically assumed. Never quite the dead ringer its proponents took it for, the phonetic is only one piece of the puzzle: a partial object that does not reveal the whole. Apropos of both authors, the pseudonymous code is doubled by the ideographic reading of the Chinese characters 江戸川乱歩 (e-do-gawa ram-po). “Edogawa,” which literally means “Edo River,” 7 betokens for Rampo the precincts of the old Tokyo downtown properly called the shitamachi (the “low city”), where the lingering vestiges of Tokugawa-era merchant culture jostled with the mass culture and modernist impulses of the early twentieth century. As Rampo explains in a cameo appearance in the story “Mera hakase no fushigina hanzai” (Doctor Mera’s Mysterious Crimes, 1932):</p>
<p>In order to develop ideas for detective novels I often travel to different places, but when I am in Tokyo, I always return to the same spots – Asakusa Park and the Flower Palace, the Ueno Museum and Zoo, the steam ferry over the Sumida River, and the Ryōgoku Kokugikan (I’m drawn to its round roof, which reminds me of the former Panorama Building). (Rampo Reader, p. 101)8</p>
<p>The Flower Palace, or Hanayashiki, was an amusement park built on the grounds of Asakusa Park. The Kokugikan (literally, “National Sport Hall”), subsequently rebuilt in 1950 and again in 1985, remains Tokyo’s showpiece arena for sumo wrestling. The Panorama Building, which was destroyed in the Great Kantō Earthquake of 1923, was among the first permanent places for cinema and other new media visual spectacles. Along with the park, museum and zoo at Ueno, these were some of the leading attractions that made the old Tokyo downtown the center of both mass culture and avant-garde experimentation. Temple grounds such as the Sensōji in Asakusa, vaudeville-like yose theaters, open air stalls, and sundry traditional entertainments contributed to the eclectic and festive scene.9 In spite of, or perhaps because of, its carnivalesque excesses, Asakusa in particular was a famously disreputable and squalid place even before the hard economic times brought on by Japan’s increased militarism and the Great Depression. In any event, for Rampo these were not only locales where tradition butted up against modernity, or high culture encountered low, but contact zones where the firm lines separating the quotidian, bourgeois realities of daily life from the realm of dreams and unconscious desires terrifyingly blurred and disappeared. Recalling Poe’s poem which asks, “Is all that we see or seem | But a dream within a dream?” 10 the basue, that seedy fringe of neighborhoods on the outskirts of the imperial capital’s urban core which appears in Rampo’s “The Daydream,” “The Horrors of Film” and other works, was not only a literary trope, but a physical and psychological destination. </p>
<p>If “Edogawa” was the place to be, the way to properly experience it was in motion, with restless feet and a roving eye. Or, to borrow from Baudelaire’s seminal essay “The Painter of Modern Life” (1859), as a flâneur. A person who strolls along the city streets in order to experience the constant changes and sensations of urban life, the flâneur signified both a privileged male gaze and a means of apprehending modernity. It is worth quoting from the original essay to convey the expansive nuances of the term:</p>
<p>Observer, philosopher, flâneur – call him what you will... Sometimes he is a poet; more often he comes closer to the novelist or the moralist; he is the painter of the passing moment and of all the suggestions of eternity it contains. Every country, to its pleasure and glory, has possessed a few men of this stamp.11</p>
<p>Baudelaire’s expression “the painter of the passing moment” is strikingly reminiscent of the Japanese woodblock prints known as “pictures of the floating world” (ukiyo-e) that depicted pleasure quarters such as Yoshiwara in the old downtown of Edo/Tokyo. It was precisely during the time when Baudelaire wrote this essay that the first great wave of japonisme began to surge in Paris and London, with Japanese woodblock prints foremost among the objets d’art that inspired the vanguard of modern artists and writers. Whether or not he sought by conscious design to effect a parallel with this still-nascent movement, Baudelaire’s model for the modern artist was the French painter and journalist Constantin Guys, whose watercolors and charcoal sketches of fashionable and everyday Parisian life were often reproduced in cheap woodcuts. Baudelaire was, in fact, among the earliest collectors of japonaiseries (artworks and curios from Japan) and he no doubt recognized subtle technical and thematic affinities between Guys’ Paris and the Edo of Hokusai and Hiroshige. The impulse of modernity has never taken a unilinear path, but has crossed back and forth between Japan and the West with increasing urgency over the past century and half.</p>
<p>Baudelaire ultimately drew the imaginative force of the flâneur not from Japanese or Western art, but from Edgar Allan Poe’s “The Man of the Crowd” (1840), a short story he had translated into French.12 As if to channel the enigmatic figure in Poe’s tale, Baudelaire praised the flâneur as a living conduit of energy and embodiment of visual technology:</p>
<p>The lover of universal life enters into the crowd as though it were an immense reservoir of electrical energy. Or we might liken him to a mirror as vast as the crowd itself; or to a kaleidoscope gifted with consciousness, responding to each one of its movements and reproducing the multiplicity of life and the flickering grace of all the elements of life.13</p>
<p>While not a detective story per se, Poe’s “The Man of the Crowd” is nevertheless a study in people-watching and criminal psychology. The calmly detached but inquisitive narrator tails a mysteriously driven old man to learn why he relentlessly seeks out, and takes perverse pleasure, in being surrounded by throngs of strangers. The narrator’s conclusion is one of terrifying pathology.</p>
<p>“This old man,” I said at length, “is the type and the genius of deep crime. He refuses to be alone. He is the man of the crowd. It will be in vain to follow; for I shall learn no more of him, nor of his deeds. . . perhaps it is but one of the great mercies of God that ‘es lässt sich nicht lesen’ [it does not permit itself to be read].” 14 </p>
<p>It is unclear whether Baudelaire overlooked the criminal implications of “The Man of the Crowd” or did not see fit to comment on the narrator’s diagnosis as so much petty bourgeois morality. No less an authority than Walter Benjamin frowned upon this slippage, commenting:</p>
<p>Baudelaire saw fit to equate the man of the crowd, whom Poe’s narrator follows through the length and breadth of nocturnal London, with the flâneur. It is hard to accept this view. The man of the crowd is no flâneur. In him, composure has given way to manic behavior.15 </p>
<p>Yet regardless of which side of the law they might choose to represent, it was exactly the allure of “the type and the genius of deep crime” for Poe and Rampo that invigorated their flâneurs. </p>
<p>The Japanese translation of flâneur, yūhosha 遊歩者, fulfills Baudelaire’s description of “a gentleman stroller of the city streets,” as it consists of the characters for “play/leisure” and “walk” plus the suffix for “person.” It took only one step further for Hirai Tarō to transform the aspect of leisurely walking (yūho) into a disorderly and frenetic wanderer by adopting the characters 乱歩 (rampo) for his pen name, or as I would render it, “the rambler of the Edo River.” 16 For the publication of his first two short stories, Hirai employed a different pair of characters with the similar pronunciation of “Rampō,” meaning an indigo peak 藍峰 –  an elegant sobriquet, as he notes in his memoir Tantei shōsetsu yonjūnen (Forty Years of the Detective Novel, 1961), one worthy of a writer or painter of the floating world.17 His decision to permanently change the characters in his pen-name brought his assumed identity closer to the flâneur, and thus marked a deepened connection to the definition of modernity that flows through Poe and Baudelaire. It finds its analog not only in the literary persona of “Edogawa Rampo,” but also in the urban nomads that populate his fiction, such as the unnamed protagonist of “Hakuchūmu” (The Daydream, 1926) who wanders the streets in search of raw stimulation. Goda Saburō in “Yaneura no sanposha” (Stalker in the Attic, 1926), too, plays at being a flâneur and agent provocateur on the streets of Asakusa before turning to voyeurism and murder in the hidden, interior spaces of an otherwise nondescript Tokyo boarding house. The quintessential flâneur was Rampo’s most celebrated character, the amateur detective Akechi Kogorō, who appears in “Stalker in the Attic” as the investigator and instigator of Goda’s crimes. </p>
<p>For Rampo and his contemporaries, the flâneur was also used to convey the shock of the modern by mapping a city transformed by mass culture. As Donald Richie explains of Kawabata Yasunari in his preface to Asakusa kurenaidan (The Scarlet Gang of Asakusa, 1929–1930), “He was a flâneur, one who strolled about, committing himself to nothing and no one. An often ironic observer, he turned perception itself into a kind of judgment. Like Baudelaire on the boulevard, Kawabata in Asakusa was a literary dandy whose gaze was his only comment.” 18 The Scarlet Gang depicted by Kawabata was a notorious group of child thieves and adolescent rogues whom his (adult male) narrator pursues around Asakusa and its environs during the Great Depression. His almost wistfully romantic portrayal of their lives and “lifestyles” is compelling in its own right, but what commands the reader’s attention is a mode of modernist narration that incorporates street slang, snippets of film, popular song, theatrical revues, and innumerable visual spectacles into a mental map of Tokyo past and present. The flâneur-as-narrator may divulge little of himself, but he serves as an antenna for a never-ending stream of stimuli admirably demonstrated in the following sequence: “eroticism and nonsense and speed and comic-strip humor of current events and jazz songs and ladies’ legs...” 19</p>
<p>The decadent Symbolist poetics of the flâneur likewise resurface quite vividly in Kawabata’s essay “Akutagawa Ryūnosuke to Yoshiwara” (“Akutagawa Ryūnosuke and the Yoshiwara,” 1929), which recalls Akutagawa accompanying him to view the immediate aftermath of the 1923 earthquake: </p>
<p>Akutagawa was wearing a striped kimono and helmet. The helmet was incongruous, like a gigantic toadstool perched on the thin face and figure. Walking along in those great strides of his, swinging his body as if about to take flight, he looked like a villain setting forth on some evil mission. He was a war-horse striding past the devastated wastes, up streets that were a tangle of charred electric lines, among survivors tired and dirty as war refugees.20</p>
<p>Akutagawa’s suicide in 1927 and Kawabata’s turn from the effusive avant-gardism of The Scarlet Gang in his later works by no means left Rampo the sole purveyor of flânerie in interwar Japan. Sociologists such as Kon Wajirō and Gonda Yasunosuke likewise used firsthand, unobtrusive observation to record the customs and rituals of everyday life under mass culture, especially the pleasure-seeking found in the streets and parks of Tokyo. Kon grandiosely dubbed his scientific approach “modernology” (kōgengaku). </p>
<p>Modernist or modernological, these explorations cumulatively pointed toward the need to reassess new urban conditions and social formations. Rampo’s contribution to the interwar cultural landscape thus did not lie in a radical singularity, but in his capacity to channel the crepuscular, nocturnal, and subterranean aspects of “daily life” via the medium of detective fiction. He won a vast readership by interleaving detective fiction with elements of the erotic and grotesque; channeling the subconscious desires and dreams that could only come about in an age of mass and mechanical reproduction. </p>
<p>It is this combination of attributes that informed his choice of pseudonym and brings full circle his relationship to Poe. In his postwar critical essays in particular, Rampo frequently looked back to Poe as an uncompromising theorist and innovator of detective fiction, and judged himself lacking by comparison. It seems highly paradoxical given Rampo’s own vibrant eclecticism that he chose to construe Poe in a narrow register that did not do justice to his many talents: from Romantic poetry and Gothic tales of the macabre to comic and critical essays. Nonetheless, it is here we may locate Rampo’s longstanding commitment to elevating detective fiction, a key strategy of which was to extol Poe’s originative integrity in a genre that had become awash in countless imitators. Was this a calculated pose of humility or an actual sentiment of regret? The answer would seem to lie in his stance toward Poe in the extraordinary essay “Dickens no senben” (Dickens and Poe, 1952).</p>
<p>In his postwar writings, Rampo frequently followed Ellery Queen in acknowledging authoritative accounts of the detective novel before proceeding to excavate long-forgotten texts or overlooked aspects of mainstream literature that added depth to the picture. Rampo opens this essay with a brief genealogy of detective fiction, noting that the first work to employ the devices of modern detective fiction was neither Wilkie Collins’ The Moonstone (1868) nor Poe’s “Murders in the Rue Morgue” (published in April 1841). Both were pre-empted by Dickens’ Barnaby Rudge, which commenced serialization a mere three months prior to “Murders in the Rue Morgue.” Rampo recounts the one and only historic encounter of Dickens and Poe in Philadelphia in 1842, where Poe shared with Dickens a review and critique of Barnaby Rudge he had published several months prior to its final installments. The critique was, in fact, an exposé that solved the murder mystery in chapter one of Barnaby Rudge with a surprising degree of accuracy. Its merits alone were sufficient to earn Poe an audience with Dickens, the trans-Atlantic literary sensation, then touring the United States. Much of the scholarly attention devoted to their brief meeting has focused on the impecunious American’s request for assistance finding publishers for his work in England, and his remarks in the review about the pet raven in Rudge which he felt confident he could put to better advantage.21 Although he takes note of these details, Rampo’s primary interest was rather the contest of ideas between Dickens and Poe. The raven notwithstanding, he persists in his conviction that in so serious a matter as detective fiction, Poe would never stoop to imitate a competitor’s techniques. On the contrary, Dickens’ whodunit in Barnaby Rudge amounted to switching the roles of murderer and victim, a ploy which Rampo, looking back a century later, dismissively categorizes as the most hackneyed in the genre’s repertoire. In sum, Rampo retraced the origins of detective fiction to the scene of the crime that begat innumerable others. He implicitly valorizes Poe for serving as his own real-life example of the amateur detective (sleuthing out the murder of Barnaby Rudge), and for insisting upon a consummate originality.22 </p>
<p>Rampo’s appreciation for Poe’s high-mindedness was not always matched by a similar willingness to sacrifice quantity for quality. In part this was a simple matter of pragmatism. A best-selling writer who was often pressured to meet the demands of his readers and publishers, Rampo clearly felt some twinges of guilt as a stylist for taking shortcuts he suspected the meticulous, but far less prolific, Poe would not. Yet he was not altogether remorseful about relentlessly working and reworking his own ideas. To this extent Rampo was an unabashed genre writer, recognizing that the way to do genre well was not to invent something new, but to reorganize the pieces of familiar puzzles into unexpected arrangements. It was in particular the interplay of erotic-grotesque and detective fiction that enabled him to generate his prodigious output. However, this, too, led him on occasion to wonder aloud if he had not fatally compromised the purity of his detective fiction.</p>
<p>Whatever misgivings Rampo may have expressed, we should not fall into the trap of portraying him caught between the opposite poles of pure detective fiction and ero-guro. It is an approach which very nearly duplicates the stereotypical image of a consummately rational versus excessively Gothic Poe. As John Whitley points out, “It has often been asserted that there are, therefore, two Poes, the writer of tales of imagination, where the irrational reigns supreme, and the writer of mystery tales whose cardinal emphasis is on the operation of the reasoning faculties.”23 Whitley insists this binary opposition does a disservice to Poe, and the same can be said for Rampo. Once this dyad is shed, we may savor anew how their respective aesthetic theories accommodated hybridity and unconventionality. Indeed, when Poe and Rampo are held up side by side, it is evident a powerful symmetry is at work. Much as the mingled forms and decorative motifs of “the grotesque and arabesque” presented to Poe a formal pattern for representing the cultural logic of antebellum America, Rampo sought to articulate the “erotic grotesque” condition of interwar Japan. </p>
<p>To recognize Poe’s multifarious influences upon Rampo is in no way to mitigate Rampo’s breadth of knowledge, which ran the gamut of Anglo-American detective fiction and its literary predecessors. Since his debut in the early 1920s he liberally peppered his narratives with references to varied sources of inspiration that might serve as signposts for the well-versed reader. In “The Stalker in the Attic,” it is none other than Akechi who whets Goda’s appetite by relating true-life stories about scientists and men of letters who abused their genius by committing acts of murder. So begins Goda’s self-education in the art of crime with books by Poe, Hoffman, and Gaboriau, amongst unspecified piles of detective novels. It amounts to the training of the copycat criminal by the amateur detective and the canon of detective fiction itself, an irony not lost on Rampo as a student of this most derivative and self-referential of genres. </p>
<p>In the last decade of his career Rampo for the most part ceased fiction-writing and dedicated his energies instead toward the promotion of new writers and investigating the history of “pure” detective fiction. We should bear in mind that while some of his works were decidedly essayistic (zuihitsumono), with a characteristic off-the-cuff feel, they filled an important void left by a Japanese and English academia that still regarded detective fiction as unworthy of serious attention. In “Tantei shōsetsu no nazo” (Riddles of the Detective Novel, 1955) from which “Kikyō na chakusō” (An Eccentric Idea) is excerpted in this Reader, Rampo documented the hundreds of stratagems, or “tricks” as he preferred to call them, in international detective fiction, including faked deaths, locked room mysteries, and bizarre murder weapons. His source texts, many of which had been translated and published in Shin seinen around the time of his debut in the early 1920s, read as a veritable who’s who of late nineteenth and early twentieth century detective writers: John Dickson Carr, Freeman Wills Crofts, Maurice LeBlanc, Melville Davisson Post, and others. </p>
<p>Rampo’s postwar labors of love had an equally vital agenda of restoring Japan to this historical narrative. Contrary to popular assumptions even in Japan that the modern detective novel (if not modernity itself) was the exclusive preserve of the West, Rampo endeavored to show that Japan was a locus of innovation and experimentation in its own right. Never a rigid polemicist, he often used lively and humorous anecdotes to demonstrate linkages between different authors, texts and national canons that led to what is now the internationally recognized detective genre. Nowhere is this better demonstrated than his essay “Fingerprint Novels of the Meiji Period” (“Meiji no shimon shōsetsu,” 1951), which traces the discovery of the handprint, forerunner to the now-ubiquitous practices of forensic fingerprinting, to the Scottish surgeon Henry Faulds at the Tsukiji Hospital in Tokyo in 1878. Faulds published his initial observations in a letter dated October 28, 1880 entitled “On the Skin-furrows of the Hand,” to the British journal Nature, setting in motion a bitter contest with William Herschel and Francis Galton. </p>
<p>Yet Rampo went much further than forensics alone. Citing Ellery Queen, who claimed Mark Twain’s Life on the Mississippi (1883) and Pudd’nhead Wilson (1894) as the first and second appearances of forensic fingerprinting in world literature, Rampo argued for the inclusion between them of the Australian-born, Japanese-language raconteur Kairakutei Black’s story Gentō (The Magic Lantern) from 1892, also tellingly known as Iwade ginkō chisen no tegata (The Bloodstained Handprint at the Iwade Bank). His story is remarkably prescient in using the magnified and projected image of a handprint for solving a murder a full decade before the first police departments in the world accepted fingerprinting as standard operating procedure. Pulling no punches, Rampo takes to task no less lofty a personage than Arthur Conan Doyle, noting that two of the short stories in The Return of Sherlock Holmes failed to correctly use fingerprints left at the scene of the crime in like fashion. As he drily observes, “for a book published in 1905 it comes across as betraying a lack of knowledge about fingerprints” (Rampo Reader, p. 186). Here and elsewhere, Rampo’s knack for connecting the seemingly disparate threads of detective fiction, mass technologies and changing definitions of the individual compels a powerful rethinking of many critical aspects of Japanese modernity.</p>
<p>II. Menagerie of the Erotic Grotesque</p>
<p>Since its appearance in the popular press around 1930, the catchphrase “erotic grotesque nonsense” has become one of the dominant frameworks for understanding the zeitgeist of interwar Japan. While it is associated to varying degrees with the historical avant-garde and mass culture, it also functioned as a floating signifier for the tensions and excesses wrought by the rapid assimilation of capitalism, industrialization, nationalism, and empire-building since the turn of the century. The erotic grotesque was even used to express a renewal of sorts for Tokugawa period cultural practices repressed by the ethos of “Civilization and Enlightenment” (bunmei kaika) during the Meiji Restoration. Rampo exploited these layers of ambiguity not simply to cater to bizarre or decadent cosmopolitan tastes, but to disclose the contradictions inherent in Japanese modernity. </p>
<p>The foundations for Rampo’s approach to the erotic grotesque can be traced back to the modes of collecting and exhibiting humanistic knowledge of the nineteenth century. Lenses, mirrors, panoramic vistas, and the like, which underpinned this regime of vision – what Jonathan Crary collectively calls “techniques of the observer” – are an integral part of Rampo’s repertoire.24 His oeuvre is likewise rife with dolls, mannequins, automata, and puppets that straddle the animate-inanimate divide and which originated in the museums, department stores, vaudeville theaters, and other places where modern life was consumed as spectacle. His signature gesture within the discourse of the erotic grotesque was his seemingly endless selection and recombination of these optic and anthropomorphic devices as well as his inclusion of the thrilling new media technology of the early twentieth century.</p>
<p>For Rampo the erotic grotesque was no less than a means of playing with, and interrogating, forms of sexuality. Rampo clearly saw sexual identity as a fluid historical and scientific construct. Definitions of male sexuality were still in flux compared with a generation earlier, while for women the rise of the “modern girl” (moga) and a vigorous suffrage movement promised both fashionable consumerism and political liberalization.25 Yet as Sabine Frühstück explores in Colonizing Sex: Sexology and Social Control in Modern Japan (Berkeley: U. of California Press, 2003), the Japanese government exercised control over sexuality through public hygiene, sex education, and physical fitness in keeping with the twofold project of national security and imperial expansion. Ero guro effectively became the literary master code for balancing potentially prurient entertainment with scientific edification or its approximation from the burgeoning fields of psychology, psychoanalysis, and sexology. It should not be surprising that Rampo and his contemporaries, who were socialized into this system, inevitably carried forth some of its prejudices and modes of thought despite their efforts to gain critical and aesthetic distance from it.</p>
<p>Rampo frequently turned to brief autobiographical essays as a touchstone for his visual and sexual curiosity. In many instances he worked out ideas that also appear in his fiction, or returned to comment upon them afterward. Despite his characteristically humble tone, the novelist in Rampo surely could not resist a certain element of self-mythologization while describing his personal revelations of pure vision, or new media, or sexual identity. A case in point is “Renzu shikōshō” (A Fascination with Lenses, 1937), which relates his lifelong obsessions with visuality that began with bouts of chronic depression he suffered as a boy. At such times he would lock himself in his room, turn off the lights and close the blinds for solace. Yet to his great surprise, he discovered a seemingly magical image of the world outside his window that streamed through a tiny opening in the blinds, projecting itself across the room on the sliding paper screen:</p>
<p>One day as I lay there listlessly in the dark, I unexpectedly became aware that the scenery from outdoors was being cast upon the shōji through a pinhole in the blinds. The verdant branches of a tree dense with foliage were reflected in such a way that virtually every single leaf was delineated with extreme detail and clarity. The tiles of the roof also appeared to be of a different and altogether more radiant color than when seen with the naked eye. Below the tiles and the leaves on the tree (the scenery was reflected on the screen upside-down) came the glorious color of the vast sky. Interspersed within this shade of blue like the painted backgrounds of pictures in the Panorama Building were fluffy white clouds that slowly crept along like bugs. (Rampo Reader, p. 147)</p>
<p>Although Rampo did not bother to explicitly name what he assumed would be obvious to his readers, the natural phenomenon he witnessed was the spontaneous workings of a camera obscura. In fact, it is this very absence of physical machinery that allowed him to indulge in a moment of pure vision. Whether it is a reflection in a mirror or voyeuristic glimpses of forbidden, unknown, or utopian worlds, the same thrill of the gaze would rescue more than one of his world-weary protagonists from their own depths of despair.</p>
<p>As distinct from Kawabata and Tanizaki’s earlier turns at screenplay writing, Rampo was among the first major writers to have their literary works brought to the silent screen without major personal involvement.26 A version of his serial novel Issun bōshi (The Dwarf, 1926–27) directed by Shiba Seika and based upon Naoki Sanjūgo’s screenplay premiered in 1927, initiating a long legacy of cinematizations that has continued to this day. This is not to suggest Rampo was disinterested in the technical and aesthetic possibilities of film. It was rather that his views of film and other media were expressed most directly in his stories and essays.27 </p>
<p>To be sure, Rampo’s essays are highly impressionistic and thus do not easily lend themselves to sustained analysis. Where he excels is in capturing the excitement and anxieties engendered by new media. A common thread that runs through them is the visceral sensation of fear (kyōfu). For example, “Koe no kyōfu” (literally “horrors of the voice,” translated here as “Spectral Voices,” 1925) is devoted to sound effects. Rampo was by no means a rigid technological determinist. This is evident from his references to Poe’s prose poem “Shadow” and to Japanese folklore, both regarding the terrifying prospect of voices arising from thin air. Nonetheless, the invention of the gramophone, telephone, and radio enabled the disembodied voice to extend its reach in unpredictable and increasingly ubiquitous ways. No less eerie than the simulation of life in dolls and automata, these new technologies seemed to possess an existence of their own. </p>
<p> “Eiga no kyōfu” (The Horrors of Film, 1926), the companion piece to “Spectral Voices,” catalogues various panic-inducing special effects from the sudden and shocking appearance of film negatives on-screen at the end of a film to the weird, three-dimensional illusions that could be spied through blue-and-red lenses. What stands out most, however, is the film of a beautiful woman’s face projected in close-up becoming stuck in the projector until the hot lamps cause the celluloid film to catch fire. The black-and-white image frozen on screen appears to be devoured by an alien redness: a contagion that leaps from the realm of cinematic fantasy to life-and-death reality as flames threaten to engulf the entire building. It is not without cause we are reminded in the darkened movie theater to note the exits in case of fire.28 </p>
<p>This deep-seated fear of film come alive and burning is refracted in the bloody catharsis at the conclusion of the surreal “Martian Canals.” In this story a nameless, amnesiac narrator is lost in a thick forest, endowed only with a kind of monochrome sense of sight befitting the era of silent film. He wends his way to a mysterious reflecting pool at the center of the wood, whereupon he suddenly finds himself transfigured into the naked body of his female lover. Something compels him to swim to a rock in the heart of the murky waters where he ecstatically rends his newfound flesh with his fingernails, resulting in the gory red marks that supply the title’s imagery. Up to this point the psychoanalytically charged scene all but compels a reading of the reflecting pool as the silver screen upon which the man’s subconscious desires are violently and inexplicably projected. Yet the scene abruptly fades out before any epiphany is achieved, and the narrator awakens in bed with his lover calling out to him. Her reassurances that it was just a nightmare momentarily assuage him, but her words are belied by her vaguely menacing presence as she hovers over him. It is helpful to recall Rampo’s remarks in “The Horrors of Film” about the madness-inducing sight of one’s own face in a concave mirror as the protagonist helplessly watches his lover’s face magnified beyond recognition. Finally, her face looms cavernously over him, until at last, “with the immensity of a planet, her cheek slowly engulfed my field of vision” (Rampo Reader, p. 15). This eclipse of vision, or “the idea of being robbed of one’s eyes” such as is realized most graphically in Rampo’s “The Caterpillar,” is precisely where Freud locates the definition of the uncanny.29</p>
<p>Of course there were other social dangers and temptations in dimly lit theater halls and movie shacks (katsudō koya), as the furtive behavior of the protagonist of “Stalker in the Attic” attests (Rampo Reader, p. 47). Rampo himself was no stranger to the slippages of normative sexuality or the secretive codes, gestures, and closeted identities of homosexuality that helped to shape the shadowy world of detective fiction. As Gregory Pflugfelder notes in Cartographies of Desire, Rampo collaborated with cultural historian Iwata Junichi in the assembly of an archive of nanshoku (male-male love) literature and lent a hand getting him published in popular magazines such as Hanzai kōron (Crime Review) and Tantei shōsetsu (Detective Novel). Rampo was an active participant in the homosexual discourse of the 1920s and 1930s, alongside intellectuals and writers including Minakata Kumagusu, Watanuki Rokusuke, Inagaki Taruho, and Hamao Shirō.30 Their studies and discussions may have betokened nostalgia for the ars erotica of the Tokugawa period, but there was no escaping from the pathologically grounded lenses of sexology and criminology in their own age. An ever-widening historical and cultural gulf separated nanshoku from the modern construct of homosexuality (dōseiai), as well as the scientific and semantic shadings of Krafft-Ebing’s sexological terms “pervert,” “invert,” and “Urning.” No less problematically, queerness was transferred en masse over to the cosmopolitan realm of ero-guro entertainment only at the expense of foregoing any claims to social equality. Decadence grudgingly tolerated was one thing, enforceable civil rights another matter entirely. </p>
<p>One of the paradoxes of ero-guro is the apparent degree of permissiveness in the mass market despite the ascent of a politically repressive and ultra-nationalistic military regime. Despite its somewhat freewheeling reputation, the erotic grotesque was not without filters, sometimes self-imposed. It is surely no coincidence that Rampo prefaces his writings on homosexuality with a disclaimer of sorts consistent with the then-mainstream psychological opinion that it was a form of mental illness. This is evident not only in the sensationalistic “Stalker in the Attic,” but his touchingly personal memoir, “Rampo uchiake banashi” (Confessions of Rampo, 1927), which looks back to his adolescent glimmerings of sexual desire and infatuation with other boys. Having witnessed the historical juncture when nanshoku gave way to the modern configurations of homosexuality with the violent containments it entailed, Rampo evinces a tendency for homophobic cover-up that consistently maps onto his professions of homoerotic ardor. His confessions thus consist of a double maneuver that affirm the author’s “platonic” love affairs with other boys, but just as quickly disavow any sexual misconduct. If Rampo could imagine homosexuality as a consensual relationship between equals unlike the hierarchical pressures of nanshoku, it remained a possibility all but foreclosed in his adulthood. </p>
<p>In contrast to the idealized love between boys and the contorted qualifications it required, another leitmotif in his oeuvre is the dangerous female sexuality epitomized by the femme fatale. Judging from the bulk of modern and modernist interwar literature alike, we might expect Rampo’s fiction to be overflowing with modern girls, but they are actually something of a rarity. The women who populate his stories are typically married women (or widows) whose modest demeanor hides a frighteningly transgressive sexual appetite. This might signal a conservative tendency on Rampo’s part, as, with the significant exception of Shizuko in Beast in the Shadows, there are scarcely any female characters blessed with the privacy and financial security to plumb the depths of their own criminal and sexual self-fulfillment (a locked room of one’s own, as it were). On the other hand, Rampo’s choice of the married woman refocuses attention upon a more enduring phase of women’s identities beyond the brief and arguably superficial freedom experienced by the faddish modern girl. Left behind are the cafés, movie theaters, or boulevards of Ginza: what remains is everyday household life and the persistence, until death, of the marital bond. With a sole exception, Rampo’s stories of lustful, murderous wives passed under the censor’s radar to reveal the rotten core upon which nation, empire, and military depended.31 </p>
<p>Rampo’s paradigm of the femme fatale goes both ways, as husbands who murder their wives, as in “The Daydream,” and wives who murder their husbands, as in “Osei tōjō” (The Appearance of Osei, 1927). There is a dimension of greater complexity, however, to Rampo’s approach toward these archetypal “poison woman” (dokufu), than merely using them to plumb the depths of literal erotic grotesque scenarios. Although the femmes fatales often come in for harsh narratorial condemnation that is spared their male counterparts, I concur with Sari Kawana’s insight that Rampo often “used his writing as an arena in which he could seek ways for women to turn to their advantage the preconceptions imposed on them.”32 We might even spy between the lines of erotically charged disapprobrium an occasional glimmer of self-determination achieved by these women. However bitterly ironic it may seem, Rampo’s decision to emphasize the appearance of Osei instead of the disappearance of her husband Kakutarō says a great deal about his priorities. Death at the hands of the femme fatale may have held its own peculiar attractions for Rampo, but I believe he took seriously the task of unconcealing women’s sexuality when presented with the opportunity.</p>
<p>III. Mirrors of Rampo</p>
<p>We have already noted the role of optical technologies such as lenses, mirrors and film in Rampo’s literary imagination. I adopt the expression “mirrors of Rampo” here to signify several further dimensions beyond the actual reflected surfaces that abound in his fiction and autobiographical essays. First, it denotes Rampo’s generic self-reflexivity. Having crafted his pseudonym into a double mirror of Poe, Rampo proceeded to construct an internal/intertextual hall of mirrors that amplified, and frequently parodied, his literary persona and his existing works. Second, “mirrors of Rampo” refers to the adaptations of his work in film and other visual media, with all of the dazzling brilliance – or cracked, wavering reflections – that implies. Third, the mirror operates as a “matrix of the symbolic”33 from dream-states that shimmer against reality to a host of body doubles, alter egos, and anthropomorphic objects that terrifyingly resemble ourselves. Lastly, Rampo uses uncertainty, irony, and camp as techniques for withholding narrative closure in such a way that bends and distorts the reader’s expectations. Causality and coincidence become nothing more than a matter of perspective or interpretation. Rampo’s narratives are like the guillotine box in “Odoru issun bōshi” (The Dancing Dwarf, 1927), where we can never be quite sure whether our eyes and rational minds deceive us. </p>
<p>Perhaps no work better exemplifies Rampo’s masterful revision of his own work than Beast in the Shadows (1934). It not only interweaves implicit and explicit references to nearly a dozen of his earlier texts such as “Stalker in the Attic,” it also features a handful of characters who come to mirror one another in ways that reflect back upon Rampo himself. In a complex series of machinations, the femme fatale Oyamada Shizuko encounters narrator-cum-detective novelist Samukawa in the deserted galleries of the Imperial Museum in Ueno and draws him into helping her to investigate threatening letters directed against herself and her wealthy industrialist husband. He is later murdered, and she blames his death upon another detective novelist: a reclusive misanthrope named Hirata Ichirō, who goes by the pseudonym Ōe Shundei and seeks revenge against her for a broken heart. Shizuko shows Samukawa the threatening letters Ōe has written, which suggest an almost godlike power of surveillance over every waking moment of Shizuko’s life. Almost in spite of himself, Samukawa becomes romantically involved with Shizuko, until he is drawn into the sado-masochistic play with a riding crop that she enjoyed with her husband. As Kawana astutely points out in her tour-de-force reading of the text, this sexual entanglement unfolds in classic hard-boiled fashion, culminating in Samukawa’s discovery that Shizuko has spectacularly invented the Hirata/Ōe persona as an elaborate alibi. She seduced Samukawa to cover her tracks, substituting him for her sexually depraved husband even as she summarily outwitted him in the detective fiction game down to the very last moments.34 </p>
<p>Samukawa and Shizuko’s convoluted relationship inexorably leads back to Rampo the author as well. Astute Japanese readers would immediately grasp that the names Ōe Shundei and Hirata Ichirō are built from the names Edogawa Rampo and Hirai Tarō.35 The detective novelist Samukawa, too, invites our assumption that he is a stand-in for the author. Even the bald pate of the murdered husband, who is found floating in a riverside public lavatory with a wig on his head, is a tantalizingly bit of self-deprecating erotic grotesque nonsense on Rampo’s part. I would suggest that all are legitimate refractions of Rampo. Yet none is quite as shocking as the disclosure that behind Hirata/Ōe, the detective novelist whose works parody Rampo’s own, is Shizuko. Like the male narrator of “The Martian Canals” who becomes the incarnation of the femme fatale, or Goda Saburō who cross-dresses to the same effect, Rampo identifies himself most compellingly with Shizuko as the feminine embodiment of the erotic grotesque detective novel.</p>
<p>For the second category, I need not reiterate Tatsumi Takayuki’s excellent précis of the cinematic and theatrical “mirrors of Rampo” that have flooded the market in recent years. I only hasten to add that two of them, Okuyama Kazuyoshi’s 1994 film RAMPO (international title: The Mystery of Rampo) and the 2005 film Rampo Jigoku (literally, “The Hell of Rampo,” international title: Rampo Noir), are partially based upon stories and essays in this anthology. The Mystery of Rampo interweaves the life of a fictionalized Edogawa Rampo with an extensive pastiche of his oeuvre. The film begins with an animated short of “The Appearance of Osei” that sets the tone for the patchwork of Rampoesque media and genre elements to come. The live action next scene then shows a censor banning “Osei” and warning Rampo and his editor Yokomizo Seishi against publishing any further immoral works. Resigned to burn his now-useless manuscripts in despair, Rampo is shocked to learn that an identical “accidental” death has appeared in the newspaper by a woman named Shizuko – homage to the Beast in the Shadows, no doubt. Her widow’s allure and the ambiguous circumstances of her husband’s death inspire Rampo to throw himself headlong into the fictional world that is now seemingly projecting from his imagination into reality. This sets in motion a rivalry in alternating scenes for her love between Rampo and his alter ego Akechi Kogorō. Their love triangle and contest of wills culminates in the climactic explosion of a hallway of mirrors that underscores how tenuous the dividing line between reality and fiction, or pleasurable fantasy and madness, could become. In the pivotal moment before Rampo and Shizuko are reunited for a classic Hollywood ending suitably shot in black-and-white, the mirrors of Rampo shatter into a multitude of possibilities instead of merely reflecting back the Romantic conceit of the author as a singular genius. No sooner does Shizuko embrace Rampo than her face freezes in a blinding white light and flames devour the screen. The last words of the film, as it were, are the letters R-A-M-P-O as if scratched into the lid of a hope chest.</p>
<p>Another fascinating element of this film is a series of voice-overs describing a solipsistic wanderer lost in a sensorium of pure vision that comes directly from “The Martian Canals.” Although Okuyama never discloses the source, he unquestionably channels its cinematic and avant-garde aesthetics. The closest approximation to its juxtaposition of visuality and sexuality is a scene of disquieting eroticism that takes place in the mansion of the debauched aristocrat Duke Ogawara. The duke binds and caresses Shizuko’s nude torso in imitation of a pornographic film playing on a screen as Akechi voyeuristically looks on unobserved from an upper-story window. The duke presses his heavily painted face into her back, leaving Rorschach-like markings on her flesh distinctly reminiscent of the violent sexual metamorphosis of the original story.</p>
<p>An omnibus film loosely connecting four of Rampo’s best-known short stories, Rampo Noir also features an interpretation of “The Martian Canals” by director Takeuchi Suguru. Takeuchi employs a minimalist extremism that strips away cinematic convention in an effort to convey violently scopophilic impulses. Although he breaks faith with the absolute silence of the original by employing a sustained, irksome mechanical screech sufficient to make the audience wonder if something has gone horribly wrong with the audio equipment, the film ultimately succeeds in establishing its own uniquely disturbing performance art vision of this story “impossible to realize onscreen” (eiga-ka fukanō)36 that is, appropriately enough, followed by director Akio Jissōji’s alternative version of “The Hell of Mirrors.” </p>
<p>The composite effects of mirror-as-metaphor are amply demonstrated in “Dr. Mera’s Mysterious Crimes.” Rampo goes so far as to place himself in the story as a visitor to the Ueno Zoo, where he encounters a strange young man at dusk standing before the monkey cages. The young man regales him with the story of a Tokugawa period townsman who loses his sword to a monkey while traveling deep in the mountains, but cleverly applies his knowledge of imitation to trick the monkey into stabbing itself to death with the stolen blade. He equates the frightful mimicry of monkey-see, monkey-do with the self-discovery of oneself in a mirror. “Isn’t it a bit scary when you stare too long into a mirror? I can’t think of anything worse. Why? Because there is another version of yourself in the mirror, which imitates you just like a monkey” (Rampo Reader, p. 104).37</p>
<p>Once he has earned Rampo’s rapt attention, the young man commences a new story about murders that took place in the heart of Tokyo’s Marunouchi business district. Two identical buildings, one occupied and the other abandoned, face each other across an alley. Their exteriors are so uncannily similar that, when animated by the full moon, anyone caught looking out into the alley between them would fall under a spell as though gazing upon a magic mirror. The malignant ophthalmologist Dr. Mera who lives in the immediate vicinity exploits this strange place. A taciturn bachelor with odd tastes, Mera assembles a veritable menagerie of the erotic grotesque in his office: a glass cabinet full of fake eyeballs; lifelike mannequins and skeletons; and a library of books on psychology and criminology. Mera’s esoteric knowledge and props come in handy as he sneaks into the abandoned building, and commits a series of murders using a mannequin dressed to perfectly resemble successive occupants of an upper-story rented room across the alley. He entices his victims to look his way under the  bewitching moonlight, and then hypnotizes them to imitate the mannequin, so that each one hangs himself outside the window. Mera becomes a human puppet master, using involuntary psychological responses to mirror images as a lethal mix of science and superstition.</p>
<p>For this somewhat farcical tale, Rampo draws upon the laws of imitation espoused by sociologist and criminologist Gabriel Tarde (1843–1904). Tarde fits squarely in the context of Rampo’s reading of now-obscure psychologists, criminologists, and sexologists; references which pepper his work less frequently than detective fiction writers, but nevertheless reveal the scientific (or pseudo-scientific) sources of his ideas. Indeed, Tarde’s principles of universal repetition enacted between the two poles of invention and imitation effectively parallel Rampo’s own views on literary production.</p>
<p>These mirror tricks bring us to the final point I would like to make about Rampo’s literary technique, namely his fondness for a twist at the conclusion. As if to supply the black humor requisite to restoring the oft-omitted third element of erotic grotesque nonsense, time and again he underscores the thin line between the sublime and absurd. Yet his purpose was not merely to toy with the reader. Rampo frequently introduces a reversal to demonstrate how easily perception can be distorted. It is a remarkably effective contrivance, whether the events transpire at the liminal boundary of dreams and reality as in “The Daydream” and “The Martian Canals,” or the tacking-on of an alternative interpretation to events the reader knows to be factual. The mysterious woman in “Bōkūgō” (The Air Raid Shelter, 1956) for instance, turns out to be something quite different than her lover imagined amidst the terrifying American bombing raids on Tokyo. His efforts to track her down are thwarted when she fails to reveal herself, but her piercing laughter that substitutes for the last word more than rectifies the imbalance in narrative bias toward the man’s perspective and privileged male gaze. “The Appearance of Osei” and “Poison Weeds” likewise play this game with the reader, taunting us with the faux naïve suggestion that mere coincidence could explain the circumstantial evidence for grisly crimes. In the final analysis it was not the solving of crimes to restore social order but the epistemological uncertainty they occasioned which Rampo found most compelling. Surely this was also his way of obliquely commenting upon the darkening political climate of interwar Japan, as when the narrator in “The Appearance of Osei” gamely suggests that a customer in a second-hand shop might someday chance upon the accursed hope chest and conclude of the letters brutally scratched on the inner lid of the hope chest, “Perhaps it was nothing more than an inscription to an innocent maiden unblemished by the ugliness of the world” (Rampo Reader, p. 34).</p>
<p>ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</p>
<p>I conceived of this book while conducting research some years ago at Waseda University in Tokyo. Professor Takahashi Toshio and his graduate students in modern Japanese literature offered words of encouragement and advice that helped shape the selection of works.</p>
<p>Edogawa Rampo’s son Hirai Ryūtarō and grandson Hirai Kentarō provided essential assistance to make this book possible, as did the staff of the Rampo House at Rikkyō University. Gonda Manji and the editors of the Kōbunsha edition of Rampo’s collected works helped to answer many questions.</p>
<p>Extensive thanks are due to the organizers and participants of the Rampo Workshop at New York University in April 2007 and the International Rampo Conference at Ritsumeikan University in Kyoto in December 2007, including Mark Driscoll, Chris Hill, Yukiko Hanawa, Yoshikuni Igarashi, Tom LaMarre, Livia Monnet, Tom Looser, Nakagawa Shigemi, Tatsumi Takayuki, and Keith Vincent. Professors Junko Ota and Madalena Hashimoto at the Center for Japanese Studies at the University of São Paulo generously invited me to present a version of “Mirrors of Rampo” in June 2008, which proved to be a very exciting opportunity to present Edogawa Rampo to a Brazilian audience. I am grateful to Jeffrey Angles, Sari Kawana, and Mark Silver for their research into Rampo’s literature and thought.</p>
<p>A Vice Presidential Assigned Time Award from San Francisco State University facilitated completion of this project in a timely fashion. I would also like to thank Kurodahan Press publisher Edward Lipsett and editor Chris Ryal for sharing my vision of this project. Their advice and patience have been greatly appreciated. Lastly, special thanks go to my family for their perpetual support. This book is dedicated to Poe.</p>
<p>BIBLIOGRAPHY</p>
<p>Baudelaire, Charles. The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays. Trans. Jonathan Mayne. New  York: Phaidon, 1964.</p>
<p>Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations. Trans. Harry Zohn. New York: Schocken Books, 1968.</p>
<p>Brown, Kendall and Sharon Minichiello, eds. Taishō Chic: Japanese Modernity, Nostalgia and Deco. Honolulu: Honolulu Academy of Arts, 2001.</p>
<p>Edogawa, Rampo. Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination. Trans. James B. Harris. Rutland: Tuttle, 1956.</p>
<p>—. The Black Lizard and Beast in the Shadows. Trans. Ian Hughes. Fukuoka: Kurodahan Press, 2006.</p>
<p>—. Edogawa Rampo zenshū. Ed. Shinpo Hirohisa and Yamamae Yuzuru. 30 vols. Tokyo: Kōbunsha, 2003–6. </p>
<p>Sigmund Freud. “The Uncanny.” In Pelican Freud Library 14, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985.</p>
<p>Harootunian, Harry. Overcome by Modernity: History, Culture, and Community in Interwar Japan. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000.</p>
<p>Igarashi, Yoshikuni. “Edogawa Rampo and the Excess of Vision: An Ocular Critique of Modernity in 1920s Japan.” positions: east asia cultures critique 13.2 (Fall 2005): 299–327.</p>
<p>Kawabata, Yasunari. Scarlet Gang of Asakusa. Trans. Alisa Freedman. Berkeley: U. of California Press, 2005.</p>
<p>Kawana, Sari. Murder Most Modern: Detective Fiction and Japanese Culture. Minneapolis: U. of Minnesota Press, 2008.</p>
<p>Kida Junichirō, ed. Edogawa Rampo zuihitsushū. Tokyo: Chikuma Bunko, 1994.</p>
<p>LaMarre, Thomas. Shadows on the Screen: Tanizaki Junichirō on Cinema and “Oriental” Aesthetics. Ann Arbor: Center for Japanese Studies at University of Michigan, 2005.</p>
<p>Looser, Thomas. “From Edogawa to Miyazaki: Cinematic and Anime-ic Architectures of Early and Late Twentieth-century Japan.” Japan Forum 14.2 (2002): 297–328.</p>
<p>Matsuyama, Iwao. Rampo to Tokyo. Tokyo: Parco, 1984.</p>
<p>Nishiguchi Tōru and Ogata Ryūtarō, eds. Edogawa Rampo: dare mo ga akogareta shōnen tanteidan. Tokyo: Kawade, 2003.</p>
<p>Pflugfelder, Gregory. Cartographies of Desire: Male-Male Sexuality in Japanese Discourse, 1600–1950. Berkeley: U. of California Press, 1999.</p>
<p>Poe, Edgar Allan. Selected Prose and Poetry. Edited with an introduction by W.H. Auden. New York: Rinehart, 1959.</p>
<p>—.  Tales of Mystery and Imagination. Introduction and notes by John S. Whitley. Ware, Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Editions, 1993.</p>
<p>Reichert, James. “Deviance and Social Darwinism in Edogawa Ranpo’s Erotic-Grotesque Thriller Kotō no oni.” Journal of Japanese Studies 27.1 (Winter 2001): 113–141.</p>
<p>Seidensticker, Edward. Tokyo Rising: The City Since the Great Earthquake. Cambridge: Harvard U. Press, 1991.</p>
<p>Sharp, Jasper. “Watcher in the Attic.” Midnight Eye. Published October 10, 2002. Last accessed December 10, 2008. http://www.midnighteye.com/reviews/watcher-in-the-attic/</p>
<p>Silver, Mark. Purloined Letters: Cultural Borrowing and Japanese Crime Literature, 1868–1937. Honolulu: U. of Hawaii Press, 2008. </p>
<p>Silverberg, Miriam. Erotic, Grotesque, Nonsense. Berkeley: U. of California Press, 2006.</p>
<p>Shimada, Masahiko. “Rampo to nozoki.” Morimoto Masahiko, ed. Chikuma Nihon bungaku zenshū: Edogawa Rampo. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobō, 1994. </p>
<p>Shinpo Hirohisa, ed. Edogawa Rampo to jūsan no hōseki. Tokyo: Kōbunsha, 2007.</p>
<p>Suzuki Sadami, ed. Edogawa Rampo (Shinchō Nihon bungaku arubamu 41). Tokyo: Shinchōsha, 1993.</p>
<p>Taiyō henshūbu, eds. Edogawa Rampo. Tokyo: Corona Books, 1998.</p>
<p>Takahashi, Seori. Kankaku no modan: Sakutarō, Junichirō, Kenji, Rampo. Tokyo: Serika Shobō, 2003.</p>
<p>Takahashi, Yasuo. Rampo – Kinema Asakusa Cosmos-za. Tokyo: Hokueisha, 1994.</p>
<p>Tyler, William, ed. Modanizumu: Modernist Fiction from Japan, 1913–1938. Honolulu: U. of Hawaii Press, 2008.</p>
<p>The Stories</p>
<p></p>
<p>The Daydream</p>
<p>Hakuchūmu · 1926</p>
<p>Was it a nightmare of a daydream, or did it actually happen?</p>
<p>It was a sultry afternoon and an eerily warm late spring breeze wafted against my flushed cheeks.</p>
<p>I have only a vague recollection whether I was passing through on an errand or had just gone out for a stroll, but I found myself on the outskirts of a certain part of town, walking down a wide and dusty boulevard that stretched on straight ahead as far as the eye could see.</p>
<p>Rundown merchant houses the color of a worn, faded shift silently formed a row of eaves. An elementary school student’s gym shirt stained with lines of grime was hanging in a narrow show window. Another shop front was crowded with stacks of thin wooden boxes partitioned like go boards and filled with red, yellow, white and brown seeds, as countless as grains of sand. In a cramped, dimly lit house, bicycle frames and tires were piled up to the ceiling. Sandwiched in the middle of this desolate scene was a two-story dwelling with the dingy glow of a votive lamp trickling out through its thin lattice gate, looking as though it might cry out, “Oh! Don’t press in on me from both sides like that!” The lewd strumming sounds of a samisen could also be heard coming from the house.</p>
<p>“Appuku, chikiriki, appappa... appappa...”</p>
<p>A group of girls whose braided hair was caked with dust had formed a circle in the middle of the road and were singing. “Appappa-ah-ah-ah...” The excruciating melody lazily evaporated into the hazy spring sky.</p>
<p>Several boys were jumping rope. The low point of the long rope forcefully slapped against the ground only to snap right back into the air. One boy, whose homespun kimono was open at the chest, was nimbly hopping to and fro. The scene appeared to move in slow motion, as though it had been filmed at high speed for a movie. </p>
<p>Every so often a heavily laden horse carriage would rumble past, making the street and houses shake. </p>
<p>Coming to with a jolt, I realized something was going on just ahead. Fourteen or fifteen adults and children had formed a broken circle at the side of the road. Their faces were lit with a particular kind of smile, the sort people adopt when watching a farcical comedy. One man was guffawing vigorously.</p>
<p>Curiosity compelled me to draw nearer.</p>
<p>As I moved in for a closer look, I noticed a serious face that stood out from the others. There was a man of ashen complexion who pursed his lips as he fervently expounded about something. His manner of speaking was too zealous for an ordinary festival hawker. Yet the response from the onlookers was hardly appropriate for the roadside sermon of a man of the cloth. What was going on here?</p>
<p>Before I knew it, I had joined the crowd in the semicircle to hear what he had to say.</p>
<p>The speaker cut a distinguished figure in a faded blue serge kimono with a securely tied yellow obi. At first glance, he appeared to be a well-educated man in his forties. His pale, bulbous face was framed by a head of hair that glistened like a wig. His features were rounded out by a pair of beady eyes, a fine mustache and rouge-red lips that spit discourteously as they flapped together. Sweat dripped from his long nose, while bare feet encrusted with sand and dirt poked out from beneath the hem of his kimono.</p>
<p>“How much did I love my wife, you ask?”</p>
<p>His sermon appeared to be building to a climax. His words charged with unconstrained emotion, the man searched the faces of the onlookers for some time before finally answering his own question.</p>
<p>“I loved her enough to kill her!”</p>
<p>“It’s too bad she had a wandering heart,” a heckler suddenly called out from amongst the onlookers. “Yeah, you never know when she might go and shack up with another man,” added another, his words dangerously fanning the flames.</p>
<p>“Well, she must’ve done her fair share of that by now!”</p>
<p>This was greeted with a hearty round of laughter.</p>
<p>“I fussed and fretted,” the man said, screwing up his neck in the manner of a kabuki actor. “It took its toll on my business. Every night I would plead in bed with my wife. I would put my hands together and beg.” There was a snicker. “Promise me you won’t do it. Promise you won’t give your heart to another man... But she wouldn’t listen to a word I said. She skillfully seduced me like a pro. The way she had me wrapped around her little finger, she made a fool of me every time. But if you could only imagine how enthralled I was by her charms.”</p>
<p>“Whoah-ho, so you had a good time, too!” someone interjected. There were more peals of laughter.</p>
<p>“Ladies and gentleman,” the man persisted, ignoring the catcalls. “What would you have done in my situation? Could you have stopped short of murder? She looked exquisite with her hair done up – she could arrange it so beautifully all by herself... There she was, sitting in front of her dressing table. She had just finished putting up her hair. Accentuated with makeup, her lovely face turned towards me and her red lips parted in a smile.”</p>
<p>The man raised one shoulder and struck a mie pose.1 His thick eyebrows came together and his expression changed to one of fearsome intensity. His own red lips twisted grotesquely.</p>
<p>“I knew the time had come. Now was my chance to possess this radiant vision for eternity.</p>
<p>“I took the awl I had prepared in advance and drove it with all my strength into her luxuriant hairline. A row of clenched teeth flashed through her lips before that smile vanished... and then she was dead.”</p>
<p>A boisterous marching band for an advertising campaign paraded by. Large bugles blared wildly. “Here we are in far-off Manchuria, hundreds of miles from our beloved country.” As the band trailed off, the children sang along to the chorus.</p>
<p>“My friends, they are spreading the word about me. Magara Tarō is a murderer, that’s what they are saying.”</p>
<p>Laughter ensued. Only the marching band’s drums were still audible, and they resounded each time as if accompanying the man’s speech.</p>
<p>“I cut apart my wife’s corpse into five parts. You understand my meaning – the trunk was one piece, plus two arms and two legs makes five. It was a pity, but I had no other choice. Ah, those plump, snow-white legs...” He suddenly lowered his voice. “Say, didn’t the rest of you hear the sound of water running?” Thrusting out his neck and restlessly casting his eyes about, the man looked as though he had made a momentous confession. “The water faucet in my house flowed non-stop for the entire twenty-one days of mourning. I put the five severed parts of my wife’s corpse into a wooden barrel and kept them chilled. Now gather round, ladies and gentleman.”</p>
<p>At this point the man spoke so softly we could scarcely hear him.</p>
<p>“It’s a secret technique, you see. It keeps the corpse from rotting – by turning it into a wax mummy.”</p>
<p>“A wax mummy...” The headword “MUMMY, WAXEN” from a medical book, accompanied by the author’s artistic rendition of a saponified specimen, hovered before my eyes. What on earth was this man suggesting? An irrepressible fright made my heart skip a beat. </p>
<p>“My wife’s voluptuous white torso, her arms and legs, became a lovely wax doll.”</p>
<p>“Ha-ha-ha, there you go again. How many times are you gonna repeat that nonsense we heard you talking yesterday?” someone rudely bellowed.</p>
<p>“My friends, listen!” the man’s whisper suddenly changed to a loud cry. “Can’t you grasp what I’m saying? You’ve convinced yourselves that my wife has merely run away from home. But listen carefully: I’m the one who killed her. How do you like that – aren’t you shocked? Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha! ”</p>
<p>His hideous cackling went on so long that I started to wonder if it would ever stop. But eventually the man’s face returned to its original serious expression. Once again he spoke in hushed tones. </p>
<p>“And now she has truly become mine. There’s no need for anxiety anymore. I can kiss and embrace her whenever I want. I’ve achieved my greatest desire. Still I have to be cautious. After all, I’m a murderer. You never know when the cops might stumble upon the body. But I came up with a brilliant solution for that. My hiding place is somewhere no flatfooted cop is going to think of. You there, come and take a look. Her corpse is right here decorating my shop.”</p>
<p>The man fixed his gaze on me. I gasped and stumbled backwards. Until that very moment I had not noticed it, but practically right under my nose was a white canvas sunshade that read “DRUGS” and “MEDICINAL REMEDIES” in familiar simple lettering. In plain view under glass was a model of the human body. The name of the store was Something-or-Other Drugs. The man was the owner of a pharmacy.</p>
<p>“Well, here she is. Take a good look at my lovely lady.”</p>
<p>What compelled me to do it? The next thing I knew I had ducked under the canvas sunshade.</p>
<p>In a glass box in front of me was a woman’s head. She was smiling with a row of gritted teeth bared through her lips. I could make out the putrefying skin of a real human being on the loathsome, swollen, waxen head. The tiny, downy hairs on the face were further proof that this was no fake.</p>
<p>My heart leapt into my throat. Just barely managing to keep myself from fainting, I escaped from under the sunshade. Taking care not to let the man catch me, I fled past the throng of spectators.</p>
<p>When I looked back over my shoulder, I saw a policeman standing behind the crowd. Like the others, he too was chuckling at the man’s performance.</p>
<p>“What are you laughing at? How can you neglect your duties like this? Don’t you understand what that man is saying? If you think he’s joking, go check behind that canvas. There is a human corpse on display right smack in the middle of Tokyo!”</p>
<p>I wanted to rap that unfeeling policeman on the shoulder and reprimand him, but I didn’t have the courage. Dizzily, I staggered away.</p>
<p>The white boulevard stretched ahead with no end in sight. The hazy heat rippled like seaweed through the row of telephone poles that lined the street.</p>
<p>The Martian Canals</p>
<p>Kasei no unga · 1927</p>
<p>I’m here again, I murmured to myself, as a chilling sensation set my flesh aquiver. An inky gloom blanketed my entire world. Sound and smell, even the sense of touch, dissipated from my body. I was left with nothing but a muted palette of stillness and decay enveloping me on all sides.</p>
<p>Like rain clouds gathering overhead, the leaves of the trees formed an impenetrable black bower from which not even the slightest sound could escape. Rising up from massive burnt umber trunks, the foliage became waterfalls that cascaded to the ground. They extended outwards in every direction as far as the eye could see like troops marching in a parade, until at last they tapered off into the bottomless gloom.</p>
<p>I had not the slightest idea what lay beyond the dense layers of darkness of that leafy canopy, whether a serene sun was shining down or an icy wind was blustering. The only thing I knew was that I was lost in the heavy shadows of an immense, unyielding forest, and that I had to keep walking, come what may. On and on I plodded, but I only encountered one towering tree trunk after another. The scenery did not change a bit. Fallen leaves, accumulated over hundreds of years since the birth of the forest, formed a sodden cushion underfoot, and made an unmistakable squishing sound with every step I took.</p>
<p>In this shadowy world with no other sounds, I felt as though all other living things had ceased to exist. Yet, however improbable, I could not shake the thought that the whole forest was rife with malevolent nature spirits. I imagined mountain leeches the size of snakes tumbling down from the dusky treetops above like so many raindrops insinuating their way into my collar. Although not a single thing moved before my eyes, it seemed as though a swarm of indistinct creatures like jellyfish were milling behind my back and shrieking with laughter in a voiceless choir.</p>
<p>It goes without saying that the darkness and the creatures that dwelt within it frightened me, but more than anything else it was the infinite forest, and the horror of its abyssal depths, which oppressed me. Like a newborn baby struck with awe at the vastness of space, I drew my limbs closer to my body and shivered with fear.</p>
<p>Although I was on the brink of crying out, “Mother, I’m scared!” I bit my tongue and quickened my pace to escape from that melancholy world without another moment’s hesitation.</p>
<p>Yet the further I plunged into the shadowy forest, the deeper the gloom became. How many years, perhaps decades, did I wander through that wood? Time ceased to exist. There was neither dusk nor dawn. Had I begun walking yesterday or a dozen years ago? Everything faded into uncertainty.</p>
<p>I began to suspect that I would walk forever in that forest, winding around in a giant circle. The uncertainty of my own footsteps was more disconcerting than any creature in the outside world. I once heard a story about a traveler who, because of a difference of only one inch in the gait of his left and right legs, was condemned to trace endless circles in the desert. But in the desert, clouds give way to clear skies, the sun comes out by day, and stars twinkle at night. In contrast, you could wait for kingdom come in the rook-black darkness of the forest and no sign would ever appear to guide the way. At the mere thought of it, I was riveted by a fear like no other. From the core of my being there came a shudder that beggared description. </p>
<p>Since birth I have tasted this fear more times than I can remember. The awe it inspires is sometimes accompanied by the ebb and flow of a nostalgia that might amplify it, but never makes it easier to bear. Although I only rarely come to the forest, I mysteriously find I have no memory of where I enter or when I leave. Each experience marks an altogether new horror that constricts my soul. Now, as always, the colossal shroud of death made an insignificant speck of humanity like me break into a sweat and gasp for air as I pressed forward.</p>
<p>At length I noticed my surroundings had begun to shimmer with a strange, faint glow. If pressed for a comparison, I would say it resembled light projected from a magic lantern onto a screen: the sort of glow that belongs to another world. As I pressed on, the darkness receded behind me.</p>
<p>“What’s going on? Could this be the way out of the forest?”</p>
<p>Somehow I must have forgotten the path. I had become desperate, like a man who had been trapped in there for ages. </p>
<p>I made for the light with a sense of resistance similar to wading through water. When I drew close enough, a break in the forest opened before me, accompanied by the reassuring sight of the sky. But was the color of that sky really like our own? To make matters worse, what did I see on the other side? There was no other side. Alas, I had not quite freed myself from the forest. What I thought was the edge of the wood was actually deep in its heart.</p>
<p>There was a circular pond about a hundred yards in diameter. Scarcely enough land remained to encircle the pond before it reverted back to forest. The gloom hung thick as ever. The wood showed no signs of thinning any further than the path I had already taken.</p>
<p>I had wandered through the forest many times before, but never had I learned of this pond’s existence. Consequently, when I plunged out of the forest and stood at its shore, I was stunned by its breathtaking scenery. It was like the unexpected discovery of phantasmal flowers that comes with the turn of a kaleidoscope. Yet the sky, forest and water before me were not the vivid colors you’d expect from a kaleidoscope. The sky was charcoal and the forest murky green and browns, with the water simply casting back these elementary colors. I could only speculate upon what produced the incredible beauty of the pond. Was it the ashen sky? Was it the creeping branches of the trees that even now looked as though giant spiders were about to leap down and seize their prey? Was it the bottomless depths of the pond, still as a stone, upon whose surface the surrounding scenery was reflected? It was all of these things. But there was something else. Something unfathomable.</p>
<p>Was this a world without sounds and smells, or even the touch of things brushing against the skin? Or had the senses of sound, smell and touch melted into a single sense of sight? Undoubtedly this was also true. And yet there was something else. The sky, forest and pond were bursting with longing for someone or something. The gathered force of their desire was on the verge of being exhaled in a single breath. But even so, why did it stir my heart as well?</p>
<p>Without conscious design I turned my eyes from the outside world to my own inexplicably naked body. When I saw mine was no longer the body of a man, but the ripe, rounded flesh of a girl, thoughts of being a man slipped from me and I smiled as if naught were amiss. Oh, this body of mine! A surge of happiness swept over me, and my heart leapt into my throat.</p>
<p>Amazingly, my body had become the spitting image of my lover’s. It was beautiful beyond all comparison. I now possessed a glossy and bountiful mane of black hair like an Arabian mare, shapely limbs, and white skin like the shimmering belly of a snake. I wondered – how many men I had already conquered? How would they grovel before a queen such as I?</p>
<p>In that instant everything became clear. At last I understood the mysterious beauty of the pond.</p>
<p>“Ah, how my loyal servants have waited for me. Have not my servants – the sky, forest, and waters – patiently borne untold millennia for this very moment? The wait is over! Now I shall fulfill your fervent desires.”</p>
<p>The beauty of the scenery was not complete in and of itself. It only set the stage. And I appeared before them a splendid actor.</p>
<p>How my snow-white skin was perfectly balanced with the rich depths of that gray world, the bottomless pond surrounded by the gloom-ridden forest! Oh, how it glistened! It was a grand drama, and mine was a peerless beauty.</p>
<p>I took a step into the pond. In the heart of its black waters I spied a single rock of the same ebony hue rising up, and began to silently swim for it. The water was neither warm nor cold, but thick and viscous like oil, so that when I moved my arms and legs, only the area around them formed waves. However, there was no sound and I experienced no resistance. Two or three rows of waves gently rippled over my breast. Noiselessly I advanced, swimming like a pure white swan across its placid surface. When I reached the center of the pond, I crawled onto the gleaming black rock. I must have looked much the same as a mermaid dancing in the sea in the evening calm.</p>
<p>I sprang to my feet atop the rock. There was such incredible beauty! Gazing up at the sky, I gave a cry like a burst of fireworks with all the strength in my lungs. The muscles in my chest and throat strained almost beyond their limits, then forcefully contracted back again. </p>
<p>My body began to undulate in wild motions. How to describe the splendor of it? Like the twisting and turning of a snake rent in two. My muscles were so many inchworms, caterpillars, and earthworms caught in the throes of death. I was a beast wracked with boundless pleasure and pain.</p>
<p>When I wearied of the dance, I plunged back into the black water to moisten my throat. I drank as much as I could bear of that viscous liquid, heavy as mercury.</p>
<p>Amidst my revelries still I sensed something lacking. It was not only within me, for the surrounding scenery had lost none of its mysterious tension. It, too, lay waiting for something to happen.</p>
<p>“Of course, what’s needed here is a dash of crimson,” I realized with a start. That was the missing ingredient from this fantastic picture. If I could provide a touch of color, the eye of the serpent would come alive. A splash of crimson alongside the shining white of my skin in that fathomless gray would truly bring to life the scintillating eye of the serpent.</p>
<p>Yet where was I to find material to supply that color? Were I to look from one end of the forest to another I would not find so much as a camellia blossom. There was nothing but the cluster of trees that made up the spiders’ lair. </p>
<p>“Wait a minute... Yes, of course, I know the perfect pigment after all. What ordinary paint shop sells a crimson as vivid as the one I can wrest from my heart?”</p>
<p>With thin, sharp nails I single-mindedly tore gashes all over my body. My full breasts, supple abdomen, shapely shoulders and thighs – none were spared. A river of gore flowed from the open wounds, and my body was covered in glistening red tattoos. It was as though I had donned a shirt of dripping blood.</p>
<p>This was cast back by the waters of the pond. Martian canals! My body had become just like the eerie canals on Mars. Instead of water, crimson gore flowed through them. </p>
<p>Once more I began a frenzied dance, a spinning top of alternating red and white stripes. Whirling about, I again became a snake caught in its death throes. I bent backward, stretching my chest and legs behind me until my hips were at their breaking point, straining the taut muscles bulging from my thighs. I lay with my back against the rock. Bending my shoulders and legs together like a bow, I crawled about as an inchworm might. I spread my legs and placed my neck between them, rolling to and fro like a balled-up caterpillar. Then I returned to my mimicry of an earthworm cut in half and pranced up and down. No matter what part of my body it was – my arms and shoulders, stomach and hips – flexing and relaxing everywhere, I attempted to contort into every conceivable bodily shape. It was the performance of a lifetime, and I gave it my all.</p>
<p>— ❈ —</p>
<p>“My dear, my dear.”</p>
<p>Someone was calling to me from far away. The voice gradually drew closer. My body trembled as though struck by an earthquake.</p>
<p>“Darling, did you have a nightmare?”</p>
<p>When I blearily opened my eyes, my lover’s face in profile loomed abnormally large right in front of my nose. </p>
<p>“I had a dream.”</p>
<p>“Oh you poor thing, you’re soaked through with sweat. It must have been awful.”</p>
<p>“Yes, it was a terrible dream.”</p>
<p>Like sunset over the mountains, her cheek was clearly divided into areas of light and darkness. The long, fine translucent hairs in the space between them were rimmed with gold. Brilliant beads of oil shone alongside her nostril, and the cavernous pores that exuded them breathed coquettishly. And then, with the immensity of a planet, her cheek slowly engulfed my field of vision.</p>
<p>The Appearance of Osei</p>
<p>Osei tōjō · 1927</p>
<p>Kakutarō, who suffered from tuberculosis, had once again been abandoned by his wife and saw no choice but to listlessly await her return. Good-natured though he was, Kakutarō at first felt bitterly indignant about her affair and considered using it as grounds for divorce. Gradually, however, the weakness brought on by his illness induced a sense of futility. A moment’s reflection upon the brevity of his own life and consideration for the welfare of his beloved son was all it took to rule out any violent behavior. His younger brother Kakujirō, on the other hand, observed what was going on and held to a stricter view. Kakutarō’s weakness drove Kakujirō to exasperation, and occasionally he voiced his opinions on the subject.</p>
<p>“Honestly, I can’t understand why you tolerate it. If I were you, I would have divorced her by now. What possible reason could you have to feel pity for a woman like that?”</p>
<p>But for Kakutarō it was not merely a question of pity. Of course he knew that if he divorced Osei, she and the penniless student she had undoubtedly taken as her lover would immediately find themselves in dire straits. But while he was not without sympathy for Osei, he had other, much stronger, reasons. Naturally, he was concerned for the future of his son. Moreover, while it was too embarrassing to reveal to someone like his younger brother, Kakutarō could not bring himself to part with Osei, no matter how she badly she mistreated him. He was so worried that she would leave him forever that he could not bring himself to accuse her of adultery.</p>
<p>For her part, Osei knew Kakutarō’s true feelings only too well. It might be a bit of a stretch to say, but something akin to an unspoken understanding had arisen between them. When she was not busy playing games with her secret lover, she did not neglect to devote her spare energy to Kakutarō. Though he was ashamed to admit it, Kakutarō was content with even the most threadbare display of her affection.</p>
<p>“Things aren’t so straightforward as that,” Kakutarō would reply to his brother. “I have to think of my boy. I might hold out for another year or two, but my life is as good as over. It would be unforgivable for me to pass on and leave him without a mother. Well, I might as well endure it a little longer. You never know, the day may come when Osei has a change of heart.”</p>
<p>By responding in this fashion, Kakutarō only succeeded in further exasperating his younger brother.</p>
<p>But far from being persuaded to have a change of heart by Kakutarō’s sense of compassion, day after day Osei only slipped deeper into her adulterous love affair. Whenever she felt pressured, she used her bedridden father’s slow wasting illness as an excuse. It had not been three days since she last left the house, and now she claimed she was going to visit her father again. Needless to say, it would be easy enough to verify whether she had actually gone there, but Kakutarō did not even attempt to do that. He was gripped by a strange emotion. He had, as it were, adopted the posture of protecting Osei from himself. </p>
<p>That morning, as usual, Osei carefully dressed and applied her makeup before hurrying from the house. </p>
<p>“Is it really necessary to wear that much makeup just to see your father?”</p>
<p>It took all of Kakutarō’s strength to refrain from letting sarcastic remarks like this fly from his mouth. Lately he had come to find a kind of pleasure in the self-pity that came from leaving unsaid what he most wanted to say.</p>
<p>Since he had nothing to do when his wife was away, Kakutarō had begun to dabble in bonsai. He would step barefoot into the garden and achieve a small degree of comfort from the sensation of his feet buried in the dirt. For the sake of others beside him, it was necessary to affect a passion for this hobby. At noon the maid came out to tell him lunch was ready.</p>
<p>“Excuse me, lunch is ready now... but perhaps you would prefer to eat later?”</p>
<p>It was painful for Kakutarō to see even the maid had an unmistakable look of pity in her eyes.</p>
<p>“Oh, is it lunchtime already? Well then, why don’t we eat? It would be good of you to call the boy to the table.”</p>
<p>Kakutarō put up a front of false courage and responded with as much good cheer as he could muster. No matter what he applied himself to these days, it had become a habit of his to pretend nothing was wrong.</p>
<p>On days like this when the servants felt sorry for him, the table was laden with better dishes than usual. But over the past month, Kakutarō had not enjoyed a single meal. His son Shōichi had also been touched by the pall cast over the house, and as soon as he came home this otherwise boisterous child was burdened by his father’s dismal spirits.</p>
<p>“Where’s mama?”</p>
<p>Although he knew he would receive the customary reply, Shōichi could not rest at ease until he asked this question.</p>
<p>“She’s gone to see your grandfather.”</p>
<p>When he heard the maid’s answer, a sneer quite unbecoming in a seven-year-old child appeared on Shōichi’s face. With a derisive snort, he began to shovel down his food. Though still a child, he nevertheless refrained from asking any further questions in the presence of his father. In his own way, he had his own front to maintain.</p>
<p>“Papa, is it all right if I invite over my friends?”	</p>
<p>Shōichi finished eating and cast a beseeching look at his father. Kakutarō sensed in it an innocent child’s heartfelt desire to please and could not help being moved to tears. At the same time, he felt a twinge of displeasure with himself. But the reply which came from him was yet another display of the usual false bravado.</p>
<p>“Sure, why don’t you ask them. But play quietly, okay?”</p>
<p>It might also have been the false exuberance of a child, but when Shōichi received his father’s permission, he cried, “Hurray!” and a look of happiness shone on his face. In short order a bunch of his playmates arrived at the house. Kakutarō sat at the table cleaning his teeth with a toothpick and listened to the sound of children at play coming from Shōichi’s room. </p>
<p>— 2 —</p>
<p>The children did not remain for long in Shōichi’s room. They began to play tag or some such game, and could be heard running from one room to the next. The sound of the maid’s voice trying to bring them under control also reached Kakutarō in his study. Much to their surprise, several of the children opened the sliding doors to the study and found him within.</p>
<p>“Aw, it’s just Shōichi’s father.”</p>
<p>One of the children made this impudent remark as they stared at Kakutarō, then they ran off in the opposite direction. Eventually Shōichi, too, burst into the study. “I’m gonna hide here,” he declared, and crawled under his father’s desk.</p>
<p>Kakutarō’s heart was gladdened by the activity around him. Right then and there he decided to spend the rest of the day tending to his potted plants and taking part in the children’s play. </p>
<p>“Shōichi, settle down a bit. Go call the others and I’ll tell you a story.”</p>
<p>“Yeah, that would be great!”</p>
<p>Shōichi jumped out from under the desk and dashed from the room.</p>
<p>“My father’s a great storyteller, you know.”</p>
<p>With this audacious remark, Shōichi led his friends into Kakutarō’s study.</p>
<p>“Okay, tell us a story. And make it a scary one.”</p>
<p>The children sat down clustered closely together. Their eyes flickering with a queer light as they watched Kakutarō’s face with a mixture of embarrassment and anticipation. They had no idea about his medical condition, and even if they did, they were just children, so they showed none of the excessive concern which adult visitors would have paid. This, too, pleased him.</p>
<p>Kakutarō felt happier than he had in a long time. Thinking of stories to delight children, he began, “Once upon a time there was a land ruled by a greedy king.” When he finished one story, he did not even have to wait to hear the children shout “tell us another!” He told a second story, then a third, adding as many as he was in the mood to tell. His spirits were buoyed for as long as he was transported with the children to the world of fairy tales.</p>
<p>“Well, that’s enough for now. How about a game of hide-and-seek? I’ll play, too,” Kakutarō pathetically volunteered.</p>
<p>“All right, let’s play hide-and-seek!”</p>
<p>By way of approval, the children wasted no time getting to their feet.</p>
<p>“Okay, you can hide anywhere in the house. Ready, rock-paper-scissors!”</p>
<p>As though he were a child himself, Kakutarō merrily joined in choosing the seeker. Maybe it helped him forget his illness, or perhaps it was an effort to show he was not hurt by his wife’s immoral conduct. In any event, there was definitely a measure of desperation in his behavior.</p>
<p>The first few times he intentionally became the seeker so he could look for the children’s innocent hiding places. When he tired of this and went off to hide, however, he had to take great pains to conceal his much larger frame in the closet or under the desk as the children had done.</p>
<p>“Are you ready?” </p>
<p>“No, not yet.” </p>
<p>The voices echoed weirdly through the house. </p>
<p>Kakutarō was hidden alone in the dark closet of his study. He could faintly hear the seeker going from room to room, crying, “I found so-and-so.” One child let out a squeal as he burst from his hiding place. Eventually each was discovered, until it seemed that only Kakutarō was left. He gathered that the children were tramping through the house together in search of him.</p>
<p>“Where did your father hide?”</p>
<p>“Come out, come out, wherever you are!”</p>
<p>Hearing the children’s chatter, Kakutarō approached the door of the closet.</p>
<p>“Ah-ha, my father’s gotta be hiding in the closet.”</p>
<p>He heard Shōichi speaking in a whisper at the sliding doors. Although he was just on the verge of being discovered, Kakutarō took it into his head to play a trick on the children. Opening the lid of an old hope chest, he crawled in and shut the lid back in place. He breathed a sigh of relief. Something soft, perhaps sheets and blankets, were inside the chest. It was just like lying in bed: not unpleasant in the least.</p>
<p>Just as he set the lid back on top of the chest, the sliding doors of the room burst open with a clatter like heavy boards rattling. </p>
<p>“We’ve got him!” </p>
<p>He heard a voice shout.</p>
<p>“Aw, he’s not in here.”</p>
<p>“But we heard something a second ago, right?”</p>
<p>“It must’ve been a mouse.”</p>
<p>The children innocently conferred amongst themselves in whispers (to Kakutarō hidden inside the chest they sounded extremely far away), but no matter how long they waited, they could find no sign of him in the dark closet.</p>
<p>“It’s a monster!” one of the children cried and they darted away. He could faintly hear some of them going from one room to the next shouting, “Come on out already!” A few were still opening closet doors nearby and searching for him.</p>
<p>— 3 —</p>
<p>The pitch-black confines of the chest, which smelled strongly of camphor, were strangely comfortable. Kakutarō was suddenly overcome with fond memories from his childhood. This old chest once held his dead mother’s wedding trousseau. He used to pretend it was a ship, and often climbed inside it to play. He could almost see the kind face of his mother rising up from the darkness like a ghost. </p>
<p>When he came to from his reveries, he wondered if the children hadn’t already abandoned their search, for there was no sound of them. Straining his ears, at last he heard,</p>
<p>“This is boring! Why don’t we go play out front?”</p>
<p>Although he could not tell which child said it, he heard these words coming from one spoilsport.</p>
<p>“Papa—”</p>
<p>It was Shōichi. He was making a last ditch effort to find him before going out to play with the others.</p>
<p>When Kakutarō heard his son, he knew now was the time to get out of the chest. He intended to spring out and give the impatient children a good scare. Kakutarō gave the lid a good shove to throw it open, but for some reason it remained where it was and would not budge. As though nothing were particularly amiss, he repeatedly tried again to no avail until at last the terrifying reality dawned upon him. He had accidentally locked himself inside the old hope chest.</p>
<p>The lid of the chest had an open metal clasp that fitted together with a metal fixture on the body. When Kakutarō shut the lid, he must have inadvertently let fall the upraised clasp, locking the chest as surely as if he had turned a key. Hope chests built in the old days were made of hard wooden boards with iron plates reinforcing the corners. It was nearly indestructible; and the clasp was made of the same strong stuff. There was no hope for a man in Kakutarō’s weakened state to break his way out. </p>
<p>Loudly shouting Shōichi’s name, he banged his fists against the inside of the lid. But the children must already have given up on him and gone out front to play, because there was no reply. Next he called repeatedly for the maids, straining every muscle in his body as he threw himself against the lid. But it was no use struggling when luck was against him. The maids must have been out gossiping or out of earshot in their rooms. There was no response from them, either.</p>
<p>Kakutarō’s room, where the closet was located, was the furthest down the hall. However he might scream inside the tightly locked chest, it was doubtful that his voice would carry even two or three rooms away. To make matters worse, the maids’ room was right next to the kitchen, all the way at the other end of the house. Unless they were especially careful in listening, they would never catch a single sound.</p>
<p>Though he shouted with increasing desperation, the complete lack of response led Kakutarō to wonder if he was going to die inside the chest. Thinking how ridiculous it was for such a thing to befall him, he was almost tempted to laugh aloud, though it was hardly a laughing matter. Kakutarō’s illness left him sensitive to changes in the air, and now he noticed the air quality seemed to have gotten worse. Not only was he trapped, he was starting to feel shortness of breath as well. The meticulous construction methods of the old days did not appear to leave any cracks for a breath of air to slip into or out of the sealed hope chest.</p>
<p>When this thought occurred to him, the energy that appeared to have been exhausted in his initially fierce struggles redoubled and he frantically struck and kicked at the chest with all his might. Had he been in better health, it would have been easy enough for his exertions to make a dent somewhere in the chest, but with his weak heart and frail, skinny limbs this was out of the question. The depleted air was also taking its toll on him. Exhaustion and fear made his throat painfully dry and scratchy when he tried to breathe. His feelings defied description.</p>
<p>Were he trapped almost anywhere else, Kakutarō would surely accept his fate, knowing that sooner or later he was going to die from his illness anyway. But to suffocate inside a hope chest in a closet in his own home seemed too incredible, too ludicrous, to contemplate. No matter how weak he was, this absurd way of dying was loathsome to him. Possibly the maid would come in his direction. If so, he would be saved like in a dream. His pains would come to nothing worse than a funny story to tell others. He couldn’t give up while the chance of being saved was still high. Even so, the fear and suffering were terrible to endure.</p>
<p>In the midst of his struggles, he cursed the blameless maids in a hoarse voice. He even cursed Shōichi. Neither the maids nor Shōichi could have been more than several dozen yards away, and though their lack of interest was not intentionally malicious, this very lack of culpability made him feel all the more reproachful toward them.</p>
<p>In the darkness it grew harder to breathe with each passing moment. His voice had given out. When he exhaled, it produced an odd sound like a fish out of water gasping for air. His mouth was wide open. White teeth like a skull’s were bared to the root of the gums on both jaws. Although he knew it was useless to try, both of his hands were engaged in scratching the inside of the lid. He was no longer aware of his nails, torn and broken. He was in a paroxysm of death. Yet he still clung to a thread of hope, not giving in to death despite a cruelty to his body that went beyond words. His suffering was worse than any victim of a wasting illness, or even a man sentenced to death, could know.</p>
<p>— 4 —</p>
<p>Osei, his adulterous wife, came back to the house from her rendezvous with her lover about three o’clock that afternoon, just as Kakutarō, wheezing and writhing pitifully in the wooden chest, was on the verge of abandoning his last hopes of being saved. Osei had left the house in a flurry, with hardly a care for her husband’s feelings, but, as usual, she was not without feelings of guilt on her return. As she surveyed the open doorway leading into the house, where she was reminded daily of her failed marriage, her heart beat faster at the thought that today something might prove different.</p>
<p>“Hello, I’m home.”</p>
<p>She paused for the maids’ customary reply before calling out again, but no one came to greet her at the door. There was no sign of anyone in the empty rooms. Above all else, it was peculiar that lay-about husband of hers was nowhere in sight.</p>
<p>“Is anybody home?”</p>
<p>She called out again in a high-pitched voice from the parlor. At last a hurried reply came from the maids’ room.</p>
<p>“Yes, yes, I’m coming...”</p>
<p>From the puffy look of her face, the maid appeared to have just awoken.</p>
<p>“Are you alone?” Osei asked, making a point of holding in check her usually provocative manner.	</p>
<p>“Um, Otake is doing the wash behind the house.”</p>
<p>“And my husband?”</p>
<p>“He is in his study, I imagine.”</p>
<p>“But he doesn’t appear to be there, does he?”</p>
<p>“Oh my, are you sure?”</p>
<p>“What’s going on here? You must have fallen asleep. How irresponsible. And where is my son?”</p>
<p>“Well, he was playing at home all day, and um, the master was with him, playing hide-and-seek.”</p>
<p>“My husband was playing, too? What a foolish thing to do. If that’s the case, then he must be in the yard. Go and find him. If he is there, you needn’t bother to call him back to the house,” Osei replied after listening to the maid recount the day’s events. </p>
<p>Osei delivered her strict orders and walked to her dressing room She stood before the mirror for a moment before beginning the laborious process of changing out of her kimono.</p>
<p>She was just about to undo the obi around her waist when she caught a strange scratching noise from her husband’s room next door. It did not sound like any insect she knew of, or like a mouse. Listening closely, it almost sounded like the faint rasp of a human voice. </p>
<p>Osei stopped untying her obi. Steeling herself against a sense of unease, she opened the sliding doors to the room. Although she had not noticed it before, now she saw that the door to the closet was slightly ajar. The noise appeared to be emanating from within.</p>
<p>“Help, I’m trapped in here.”</p>
<p>So quiet as to be almost imperceptible came the muffled sound of a voice, but it reached Osei’s ears with incredible clarity. It was unmistakably the voice of her husband.</p>
<p>“Oh dear, how on earth did you end up in the hope chest?”</p>
<p>As might be expected, she hurried over to the side of the chest with alarm. Unfastening the latch, she murmured, “Ah, you were playing hide-and-seek, weren’t you? You certainly have a penchant for silly games... But why is the chest locked?”</p>
<p>Now, if Osei were an evil woman, would not the speed with which she hatched her cruel plan reveal her true colors far more clearly than keeping a secret lover in violation of her marital vows? It just so happens that she had scarcely unlocked the chest and begun to lift the lid when a diabolical thought popped into her head. Without a second’s hesitation, she firmly shut the lid again and refastened the lock. At the very same moment, Kakutarō made a final attempt to free himself. It must have cost him a tremendous effort, but to Osei it was nothing more than a feeble response. To overcome him, she merely had to replace the lid. Afterwards, when she looked back upon the cold-blooded murder of her husband, what haunted Osei more than anything else was the memory of that feeble response. It was hundreds of times more terrifying than any blood-stained murder scene.</p>
<p>After Osei restored the lid of the chest, she quickly shut the closet door and hurried back to her own room. Not surprisingly, Osei lacked the nerve to remove her kimono. Instead, she sat ashen-faced before her dresser, opening and closing the drawers for no apparent reason other than to drown out the sounds coming from the room next door. </p>
<p>If I keep this up, I ought to be safe. </p>
<p>She was almost driven to distraction by the gravity of her actions. There was hardly time to regain her composure and think things over coolly. As soon as a thought came into her head, even an idea so impossible that it pained her to consider it, she would stand up, then immediately sit down again. She was wracked by indecision. After a few minutes she was able to partially catch her breath. She rapidly took stock of the situation but could find no mistakes that would lead back to her. She had discovered that he had closed the latch on himself, and Kakutarō was known to have been playing hide-and-seek with the children. Surely the children and the maids could testify to the fact that, however accidentally, he had locked himself inside the hope chest. As for her being unable to hear the thumps and screams inside the chest, it would be enough to demonstrate that it was a large house and leave it at that. Was this not exactly why the maids had no idea what had transpired?</p>
<p>Of course Osei did not think things through so carefully all at once, but even without a better alibi, her cruel, sharp instincts reassured her, “Don’t worry, everything will be fine.”</p>
<p>The maid she had sent off to look for the children had not yet returned. Nor was there any sign that the maid doing the wash behind the house had yet returned. She prayed for her husband’s cries and struggles to cease before they came looking for her. Though the desperate noises from the closet were so weak they were scarcely perceptible, still they persisted incessantly like a malevolent wind-up toy. Maybe it was just her imagination, but cocking her ear towards the door to the closet (which she did not dare open), she could have sworn the terrible commotion showed no sign of stopping. As if that were not bad enough, Kakutarō seemed to be muttering almost entirely meaningless gibberish from a tongue as rough and dry as sandpaper. There could be no doubt he was lofting fearsome curses at Osei. She was so horrified that she came dangerously close to reversing her decision not to open the chest, but she knew if she did it, the choice would be irreversible. Now that she had committed herself to murder, how could she save him?</p>
<p>Even so, we might give pause to consider how Kakutarō felt, locked as he was in the chest. The sounds he was making were enough to give even his abominable wife second thoughts. But the suffering she imagined did not amount to one thousandth  – no, not one ten thousandth – of the world of agony he was in. Just when he thought he was beyond hope, his supposedly wicked wife unexpectedly appeared and unlocked the chest. Nothing could compare to the boundless joy he felt in that instant. Osei, against whom he made daily recriminations, could increase her adultery twofold or threefold and still he would be forever grateful to her. Regardless of how sickly a person may be, life is never more precious than when one hangs on the edge of death. But no sooner had he experienced that flash of joy than Kakutarō was cast headlong into a boundless hell with a despair that defied description. If he had died without a sign of help, his pain would not have been of this world, but how much more exponentially dreadful were the agonies brought him by the hand of his treacherous wife!</p>
<p>If it was beyond Osei to fully appreciate the torment he felt, at least in the bounds of her own thoughts she pitied her husband’s excruciating death and reproached herself for her callousness. Yet there was no turning back for a femme fatale caught up in a once-in-a-lifetime affair. In her mind the funeral that lay ahead for the dead man in the now-silent closet was replaced with the image of her lover. Never mind the life of leisure guaranteed by her husband’s passing: it was enough for her to think of the uninhibited life she could lead with her lover to part with sympathy for the dead. </p>
<p>She was thus able to regain control of herself in a manner unfathomable to ordinary people. Only seconds after Kakutarō’s last breath gave out, a cold, cruel smile flickered across the corners of her lips. At last, she began to untie her obi.</p>
<p>— 5 —</p>
<p>Around eight o’clock that night, Osei contrived an elaborate display of discovering the body, and the Kitamura household was turned upside down. The large house was filled with relatives, servants, doctors and the police, all of whom rushed to the scene as soon as they got word. Since the formalities of an inquest could not be dispensed with, a host of officials stood over Kakutarō’s corpse, purposely left just as it had been found inside the chest. What a distressing sight it must have been to see Kakujirō, the younger brother who grieved Kakutarō’s passing from the bottom of his heart, alongside Osei, her face stained by tears of deceit. Refusing to sit down, they mingled amongst the officials, their feelings scarcely to be guessed by outsiders.</p>
<p>The hope chest was brought into the center of the parlor, and one of the policemen easily opened the lid. Powerful incandescent lamps illuminated Kakutarō’s hideously contorted figure. His hair, usually combed back neatly, was disheveled and wild, and his limbs were twisted as if he were still struggling against death. The eyeballs bulged in his head and his mouth gaped open almost wider than was physically possible. Insofar as Osei was not actually possessed by a devil, a hard look at his corpse would have forced her to confess her misdeeds on the spot. Nevertheless, if she could not bring herself to look directly at him, she was hardly about to confess to anything. Her tear-drenched alibi was nothing but a pack of lies. Osei found it peculiar how calm she was, even if it was the false courage which comes from killing another person. The woman who had stood with her heart pounding on the threshold of the doorway several hours earlier after returning from her illicit affair (and who was already sufficiently depraved at that) seemed to her like an entirely different person. On the face of things, it seemed as though she had been born with an evil spirit nestled inside her, which was only now revealing its true identity. There was no other apparent means of explaining how this unimaginable calm arose in response to the crisis with which she was now confronted.</p>
<p>The postmortem investigation came to the conclusion that it was a tragic accident. The body of the deceased was entrusted to the family, who had it removed from the chest and transferred elsewhere. It was only after it was gone and things had quieted down a bit that for the first time anyone noticed the scratch marks on the inside of the lid.</p>
<p>Even those who knew none of the details and did not witness Kakutarō’s horrible corpse firsthand thought the scratches were exceptionally startling. The fearsome obsessions of a dead man were carved into the wood with greater passion than any famous artist’s masterpiece. After a single glance there wasn’t a decent soul who could bear to go back for a second look. </p>
<p>It was Osei and Kakujirō who came upon this horrifying discovery. They stayed behind while others carried the body away, gazing from either side of the hope chest, their eyes frozen on some strange markings on the inside of the lid. What in heaven’s name could they be?</p>
<p>Faint as a shadow, it looked like writing in the illegible hand of a madman, but when perused closely, from the innumerable scratches it was possible to make out first one large letter, then one small, one askew, then one so distorted it took some time to read properly. At last it was clear – the four letters spelled out “O-S-E-I.”</p>
<p>“It’s you he had in mind, wasn’t it?” Kakujirō pronounced in a low tone, staring at Osei.</p>
<p>“Why yes, I think you’re right.” </p>
<p>Can we pretend to feel shocked at the cold words that came from Osei now? Of course she knew exactly what the letters meant. Before his life’s breath was extinguished, the enervated Kakutarō wrote the letters to curse her. His obsession, cut short in death as he scratched the last line of the letter “I,” was to keep writing, to record that Osei murdered him. But no matter how he desired to keep writing, sadly, this was denied him, and rancor to last a thousand years was forever locked away in those four short letters.</p>
<p>Kakujirō, who was essentially a good man, was positively incapable of taking his suspicions that far. The meaning of those four letters “O-S-E-I” could not possibly point to murder. Kakujirō came away with vague doubts about Osei, yet was convinced that his older brother had felt some lingering attachment to her. Unable to stop thinking about her even at death’s door, Kakutarō must have written her name to show the powerful emotions he felt until the end.</p>
<p>“Oh dear, look how he worried about me.”</p>
<p>After a long pause in which she waited for Kakujirō to take her words to mean that she regretted her adultery, Osei sighed deeply. Then she suddenly drew her handkerchief to her face (what celebrated actor could shed false tears so convincingly?) and sobbed uncontrollably.</p>
<p>— 6 —</p>
<p>After Kakutarō’s funeral was over, the first part of Osei’s plan was to break off relations with her illicit lover, if only for the sake of appearances. Then she devoted herself in countless stratagems to erase Kakujirō’s suspicions. To some degree, she met with success. If only temporarily, Kakujirō succumbed to the deceptions of this alluring woman.</p>
<p>In this way, Osei received a greater share of the inheritance money than she had hoped for. Taking her son Shōichi with her, she sold the old house and moved from place to place. She steered away from the prying eyes of the family and skillfully kept up her cover.</p>
<p>Osei was forced to accept the problematic hope chest, which she secretly sold to an antique furniture store. One can only speculate upon how many hands it has passed through since then. Did not the scratches and ominously scrawled letters arouse the curiosity of its new owners? Who could remain unmoved at the terrible passions the former owner poured into those scratches? Surely he must have had a certain woman in mind when he wrote those mysterious letters, “O-S-E-I.” But on the other hand, who knows? Perhaps it was nothing more than an inscription to an innocent maiden unblemished by the ugliness of the world.</p>
<p>Poison Weeds</p>
<p>Dokusō · 1927</p>
<p>It was a fine clear day in autumn when a good friend of mine came to visit. After a long and lively conversation, I turned to him and said, “The weather certainly is pleasant, isn’t it? How about if we step outside and take a stroll?” Since my house is located on the edge of town, we decided to walk over to a field nearby.</p>
<p>It was a clearing overgrown with weeds, where even in the daytime fall insects could be heard singing here and there. A creek not more than a few feet across trickled through the field. There were patches of bumpy hills. We plopped ourselves down on a slope and gazed up at the clear blue sky unblemished by a single cloud. We also looked at the muddy stream just below our feet and surveyed the seemingly infinite variety of small weeds growing on its banks. “Ah, it’s autumn,” I sighed at last, and for a good while we sat there without saying another word.</p>
<p>For some reason, a tuft of vegetation growing along the sodden banks of the creek caught my attention. </p>
<p>“Say, do you have any idea what that is?”</p>
<p>“Not a clue,” gruffly responded by friend, who hasn’t the least interest in nature.</p>
<p>But I knew that no matter how much he despised flowers and plants, at least this bit of vegetation would pique his interest. Or rather, I should say, precisely because he was a man with little appreciation for nature, the strange properties this plant possessed would come across as all the more extraordinary to him. Seeing this as an opportunity to show off my knowledge of arcane matters, I told him what it was used for.</p>
<p>“That one is called XXXX. It grows pretty much everywhere. It’s poisonous, but not terribly potent. Ordinary folks think it’s just another kind of weed. They pay no attention to it. But this plant can be used as a drug for abortion. To terminate a pregnancy in days like these when there are shortages of medicine, it’s the best remedy around. In olden times it was this very plant which midwives would secretly use to brew potions to induce miscarriages.”</p>
<p>As I expected, my friend became extremely inquisitive when he heard this. He implored me to tell him the methods for preparing the drug. “Well, well,” I teased. “What’s the matter, have you got some pressing need for it?” Despite my lighthearted comments, however, I proceeded to explain the complicated instructions to him.</p>
<p>“You take this part here and tear off a piece as long as the width of your palm. Then you peel off the outer fiber and...”</p>
<p>I guided my friend through the secret directions, gesturing as I went along. It was great fun. I watched his face light up with interest as I clued him in on every last detail.</p>
<p>Having broached the subject of abortion, we turned to the question of birth control. My friend and I readily agreed that it was chiefly a matter of concern for the younger generation. We were in favor of birth control. But in contrast to its abuse among the propertied classes, there were few in the underclass who so much as knew a contraceptive movement existed. In my own neighborhood there was actually a slum-like row house filled with families burdened with more children than they could care for. We fell to talking about these issues at length.</p>
<p>During our conversation, I could not shake from my mind the image of the aging postman’s family, which lived right behind my house. In spite of over a decade’s service delivering third-class mail in town, the poor fellow’s salary scarcely amounted to fifty yen (ten thousand yen by today’s standards) and his bonus for the o-bon holiday did not add up to twenty yen. He was fond of alcohol and always had a drink with dinner, but remained extremely steadfast in his duties. He was the type of man who had not failed to turn up every day for work in all those years. He was over fifty, but had married late in life. He had six children, the oldest of whom was twelve. The rent alone cost ten yen. </p>
<p>The question is, how did they carry on from day to day? In the evenings, his eldest daughter would carry his precious sake bottle to the liquor store to fill it up with his nightly drink. I would witness this piteous sight every day from the second story of my house. His three-year-old boy, already past the age of breast-feeding, would launch into sickly crying fits (could it be infant hysteria?) every night. The five-year-old girl, who was next closest in age, suffered from boils on her head and face. Whether they itched or hurt, she too would cry hysterically into the night. You could well imagine how their forty-year-old mother felt about them. To make matters worse, her stomach was swollen with yet another on the way. This problem was in no way limited to the postman’s family behind my house. Next door, and in the house behind theirs, there were plenty of families similarly burdened with too many children. In this wide world, how many scores of households are there as unfortunate as the postman’s?</p>
<p>My friend and I debated these matters with no end in sight until at last the short autumn day was tinged with sunset. The blue sky had darkened to the color of washed ink, and the frames of the houses in the neighborhood stood out in the fading light. The ground beneath us had now become inexplicably cold. We stood up and decided to head our respective ways home. But just as I was getting to my feet, I sensed something on the hill behind my back. Instinctively turning around, I saw the outline of a lone woman against the dusky sky like a wooden statue. Possibly it was due to the fact that there was nothing but the sky as background, for she seemed to take on monstrous proportions. But a moment later, I realized it was something far more terrifying than a ghost. The figure that stood frozen there was none other than the pregnant wife of the postman whose sad story I had just related.</p>
<p>The muscles in my face stiffened, and I was quite unable to utter so much as a word of greeting. She, too, stared off with a hollow gaze in another direction and did not attempt to make eye contact with me. All the same, it was abundantly clear that illiterate middle-aged woman had soaked up every last word we’d said.</p>
<p>As though to make our escape, we hastily retreated back to my house. A strange silence gripped us, and we scarcely exchanged good-byes when we parted. For both of us, but especially for me, her eavesdropping and the consequences it foreboded were too alarming to contemplate.</p>
<p>No sooner was I home than panic set in about the untimely appearance of my neighbor’s wife. She’d almost certainly been there from the start, and there was no doubt in my mind that she heard my entire account about the special properties of that plant. During my explanation, I couldn’t resist boasting about how easily the plant could be used to induce abortion without the slightest pangs of discomfort. Wasn’t it obvious the sort of thoughts a pregnant woman burdened with too many children would have upon hearing this? Giving birth to this child would require a costly sacrifice beyond her existing hardships. She was already getting on in years, but with a newborn child at her bosom and a three-year-old on her back, she still had to clean and cook. Despite her present condition, it was almost a ritual affair for her husband to lose his temper and needlessly shout at her. Her five-year-old daughter’s hysterics were getting worse by the day. What if these troubles could be eliminated without the slightest danger, just by taking a single clump of nameless weeds – how could she not think about it?</p>
<p>What did I have to be afraid of? Wasn’t I an advocate of contraception? If the postman’s wife followed my instructions, I told myself, it would lay to rest an unwanted life that would have been dragged from one place of darkness to another, and where’s the harm in that? I was able to come up with rationalizations like this. But no amount of excuses could keep me from shuddering convulsively. I was stricken with fear as though I’d committed the horrific crime of murder.</p>
<p>It somehow felt inappropriate to sit there and do nothing, so I restlessly paced around the house. I headed up to the verandah on the second floor where the field could be seen. In the dusk I could just barely discern the area on the hill where we sat (the postman’s wife was no longer there). For no good reason, I raced down the stairs at a breakneck pace, even taking them two or three at a time, foolishly causing a tremendous racket. I quickly slipped on my geta clogs in the entrance of my house. Several times I indecisively opened and closed the front door before I finally decided to return to the bottom of the hill. </p>
<p>I could scarcely see more than a few feet in front of my face in the twilight. Still, out of a desire not to be seen by anyone, I cowered down, constantly glancing behind me as I wended my way back to the hill. I could hear the black waters of the stream trickling through the grey mist. Several feet away in the grass, some sort of insect was keening in a weirdly clear pitch. I went cold as I spied a specimen of that plant. It should have been immediately recognizable by its plump, round leaves and monstrously thick stem that stood out from the other short weeds. But when I took a closer look, I saw that half of its stem had been broken off. It bore the oddly forlorn air of a crippled man who’d lost an arm.</p>
<p>I stood motionless, shivering in the near-complete darkness. I pictured before me the ugly mug of that forty-year-old housewife, her perennially disheveled hair like a madwoman’s, coming to a frightening decision as my friend and I abandoned the hill – the flesh of her cheeks drawn tight, she ambles down the hill, gets down on all fours and snaps off a piece of that plant. It was a ridiculous, but, at the same time, an unspeakably dire scenario. Overcome with fear, I let out a scream and had a sudden desire to run far, far away. </p>
<p>Several days later the sad situation of my neighbor’s wife still weighed heavily on my mind, but I forced myself not to think about it. I also resolved not to listen to gossip about her family. Every morning I would visit friends, go to a play or the yose theater,1 and stayed away from home until late into the night. But finally, one day as I was walking down the narrow alleyway to my house, I accidentally ran into my neighbor’s wife. </p>
<p>She had an embarrassed grin on her face when she saw me (I can hardly say how ghastly that grin appeared to me) and said hello. I peered fiercely through her wild hair at her face, which was as bloodless and haggard as a convalescent’s. As I glowered at her, my gaze gradually drew downward to her waist. Though I expected the worst, it still took my breath away to see her deflated belly, practically folded in half like that of a starving dog.</p>
<p>But the most gruesome part was yet to come. About a month later, as I brushed past my grandmother and the maid, I accidentally overheard a portion of their conversation. </p>
<p>“It’s certainly a bad month for miscarriages, isn’t it?,” I heard my grandmother say. </p>
<p>“Oh gracious, Ma’am!” This came from the maid, who let out a laugh that was hardly what you could call decorous.</p>
<p>“But you said as much yourself, didn’t you? First there was the postman’s wife.” As she spoke, my grandmother started to count with her fingers. “Next came Mrs. Kitamura Okane, and then there was what’s-her-name from the candy store. Oh yes, now I remember, her name is Orui. So there you go, three women from this block alone. That’s why I say this has been quite a month for miscarriages.”</p>
<p>My heart fairly skipped a beat as I listened in. From their conversation one might believe that the world had gone topsy-turvy. </p>
<p>So this is what we call living? I don’t know exactly what it meant, but the words drifted through my mind.</p>
<p>Once again my feet carried me from the entranceway back to that spot on the hill. It was a bright and sunny Indian summer day. A bird was leisurely tracing circles in the boundless blue sky. I refused to let myself be distracted and searched determinedly for specimens of that plant. But you see, something terrible had happened. Everywhere I looked, the stems of the plants I found were half-broken, looking for all the world like the exposed remains of mutilated corpses.</p>
<p>Maybe it was the handiwork of mischievous children in the neighborhood. Or maybe not. To this day I cannot be sure who was truly responsible.</p>
<p>The Stalker in the Attic</p>
<p>Yaneura no sanposha · 1926</p>
<p>Surely it must have been some sort of mental disease. Whether it was work or pleasure, or anything else he tried his hand at, there was nothing in this world Gōda Saburō found remotely stimulating. </p>
<p>After finishing school – he could practically count on one hand the number of days he’d bothered showing up for class – Saburō traipsed from one job to another. Yet he never came across anything that seemed worthy of devoting his entire life to. It’s possible there wasn’t an occupation in this world capable of satisfying him. He frequently changed jobs, lasting at most a year, sometimes no more than a month. Then, finally, as if to say he’d thrown in the towel, he stopped looking for another job. He literally did nothing at all, passing one listless day after another.</p>
<p>He fared no better with leisure pursuits. He went in for playing cards, billiards, tennis, swimming, mountain climbing, go, chess, and every type of gambling known to man – in short, more diversions than I can possibly write down here. He left no stone unturned in his search for amusement, even going to the lengths of purchasing some kind of hobby encyclopedia, but it was the same as with work. No matter where he looked, nothing held his attention and he always came away disappointed. Now, dear reader, no doubt you are saying to yourself, what about those two great pleasures in this world, women and wine, that are never satisfied? For some strange reason, neither held an attraction for this fellow Gōda Saburō. Alcohol must not have agreed with him, because he never drank a single drop. As for women, it wasn’t for a lack of desire, since he did his fair share of cavorting around, but it was never enough to make him feel this was what made life worth living.</p>
<p>“It would be better to die than eke out an existence in this dreary world,” he was prone to thinking. Yet even a person like him possessed the instinct to cherish life as a gift. He arrived at the age of twenty-five muttering thoughts of death, but came no closer to taking his own life.</p>
<p>Thanks to the generous monthly allowance he received from his family, his lifestyle was not adversely affected by forsaking work. One result of this sense of security may have been that it caused him to act with reckless abandon. If nothing else, he was at great pains to find new ways of making life interesting on the money his parents sent him. For instance, as with work and leisure pursuits, one of the things he frequently did was to change lodgings. It is scarcely an exaggeration to say he knew every boarding house in Tokyo. Hardly a few weeks or a month passed before he went off in search of a new place to live. In the meantime, he wandered like a nomad. Sometimes he would hide away like a hermit in a mountain retreat. But for a person accustomed to city life as he was, it was impossible to stay for long in the lonesome countryside. No sooner would he set out on a journey than before he knew it he would feel the city lights and crowded throngs beckoning, and he’d be right back in Tokyo. It goes without saying that each time this happened he switched to another boarding house.</p>
<p>For his latest move Saburō chose the Tōeikan, which had been built so recently the paint was still fresh on the walls. It was here, in this brand-new boarding house, that he discovered an exquisite kind of pleasure. The main plot of this story concerns a murder case related to his discovery, but before we proceed too far, I should explain the sequence of events that led Gōda Saburō to become an acquaintance of the amateur detective Akechi Kogorō and thus develop a new interest in crime, a matter to which he’d never given a thought in the past. </p>
<p>The two of them first became acquainted when they met quite by accident at a café, where a mutual friend introduced him to Akechi. Saburō was completely taken by Akechi’s intelligent looks, his manner of speaking and the way he carried himself. From then on, he frequently paid visits to Akechi. Sometimes Akechi, too, would visit Saburō at his boarding house. For his part, Akechi seemed to take an interest in Saburō’s pathological personality (as a kind of research case). Meanwhile, Saburō could not conceal his enjoyment listening to Akechi’s wealth of fascinating crime stories. </p>
<p>For instance, he heard about Dr. Webster, who murdered his colleague and burned his body to ash in the laboratory assay oven.1 Then there was the murderous crime of Dr. Eugene Aram, who was knowledgeable about many languages and made groundbreaking discoveries in linguistics,2 and the insurance fraud Wainewright, who also happened to be a prominent art critic.3 Likewise, he heard about Noguchi Osaburō, who boiled the flesh of small children to make medicine for his in-laws.4 And let’s not forget Landru,5 who married and killed as many wives as a latter-day Bluebeard, or the cruel murder story of Armstrong.6 We can only guess how these stories delighted the ennui-ridden Saburō. When he listened to Akechi’s eloquent speaking style, he experienced an indescribable feeling as if these tales of crime were vividly floating up before his eyes like a gaudy, gorgeously illustrated picture scroll. </p>
<p>After he had known Akechi for two or three months, Saburō looked as though he had forgotten all about his world-weariness. He bought piles of crime-related books and greedily devoured them day after day. Among them were books by Poe, Hoffman, and Gaboriau,7 jumbled in amongst a slew of other detective novels. “I had no idea there was still something in this world worthy of my attention,” he thought with a sigh of relief as he turned the last page of each book. And then he started to have reckless thoughts how it would be if he undertook his own daring, outrageous adventures like the protagonists of these crime stories. </p>
<p>But in spite of himself, he couldn’t bring himself to cross the line and break the law. He may have been willing to turn a blind eye to the insult and injury it would inflict on his parents, siblings, family, and friends, but he didn’t yet have the courage to indulge in these pleasures. From the books he read, he knew that no matter how skillfully a crime is committed, there is always a fatal flaw somewhere which leads to its discovery. With the exception of a few special cases, it is impossible to evade detection by the police forever. This is what most frightened him. It was his misfortune not to feel any interest in everyday affairs, and instead to have an unspeakable attraction to crime. To make matters worse, the dread of this realization couldn’t stop him from acting on this fascination with crime.</p>
<p>When he had done all that he could by reading his books, the next step was to begin simulating criminal acts. Because it was mere simulation, there was no need to fear punishment. For instance, he did the following.</p>
<p>He found a renewed interest in Asakusa, that neighborhood in Tokyo’s old downtown which he’d grown so utterly bored of. Bursting from its toy-box and draped in a rainbow of gaudily colored paints, the amusement grounds of Asakusa were the ultimate stage for the criminally inclined. He set out there to happily lose himself in strangely empty places like the dark, narrow alleys between movie theaters, scarcely wide enough for a person to squeeze through, or the spaces behind the public toilets. He’d scrawl arrows in chalk on the walls in the area as if to communicate with fellow criminals. When he spied a wealthy-looking pedestrian he’d pretend to be a pickpocket and see how far he could trail the victim. He’d write weirdly cryptic messages on scraps of paper – always giving details about some terrifying murder – and stuff them between the slats on park benches or hide them beneath shady trees, then lie in wait to watch someone discover them. In this fashion he devised various ways of amusing himself.</p>
<p>He also frequently donned disguises and wandered from neighborhood to neighborhood. He tested out different disguises including a laborer, a beggar, and a student, but the one which most pleased his peculiar habits was dressing as a woman. He sold off his kimono and watch to make money, and spent it collecting expensive wigs and used women’s clothes. After spending a long time trying out his favorite female get-ups, he would wrap himself from head to toe in an overcoat and slip out the door of the boarding house in the small hours of the night. When the coast was clear he would remove the overcoat. Sometimes he would wander around a deserted park, while other times he would go to a movie theater at peak hours and “accidentally” make his way to the men-only seats, to seductively entice them. These clothes made him feel as though he were living out the illusion of being a femme fatale like Dakki no Ohyaku or Uwabami Oyoshi,8 and he got a thrill imagining he had men at his mercy to do with as he pleased. </p>
<p>Nevertheless, while this play-acting at crime satisfied his desires to a degree, and even on occasion precipitated a rather interesting incident or two, it afforded him only a temporary sense of relief. It was, in the end, only play-acting and the element of danger – the appeal of crime, at least for some, lies precisely in its danger – was lacking; it didn’t give him the thrill he desired. After three months the pleasures of make-believe dissipated. And now his acquaintance with Akechi, which had been so beguiling to him, also faded away.</p>
<p>— 2 —</p>
<p>Our story continues with Gōda Saburō and Akechi Kogorō’s dealings, and reveals even more of Saburō’s criminal inclinations than what the reader has already learned. But before we return to the subject at hand, let me take a moment to describe the thrilling discoveries Gōda Saburō made in the newly built Tōeikan boarding house. </p>
<p>Saburō couldn’t wait until the construction of the Tōeikan was complete and he moved in right away. This was about a year after he met Akechi. By then he’d already lost interest in play-acting at crime, but with nothing else to take its place, it was all he could do to pass day after day in sheer boredom. When he moved to the Tōeikan he made some new acquaintances, but no matter how entertaining they were, he regarded human beings as the most idiotic of all living things. Everywhere you looked, you found the same thoughts, the same expressions, the same words, repeated over and over again. Despite his change of lodgings and encounters with new people, Saburō sunk back into the bottomless depths of ennui before the week was over. </p>
<p>Then something happened, ten days after he moved into the Tōeikan. In an excess of boredom he hit upon a wild idea. In his room, which was on the second floor, there was a large closet next to the cheap-looking tokonoma alcove. Inside, between the upper and lower tracks of the sliding door, was a sturdy shelf that spanned the length of the closet, dividing it into top and bottom halves. He piled up various articles on the lower shelf and decided to lay his bedding on the upper shelf. But instead of pulling the blankets and bedding out one by one and laying them on the floor in the middle of the room, he would often leave the futons piled up over the entire shelf as his bed. When he got tired, he decided to try lying there for a change. Had it been any of the other boarding houses, even if it had the same sturdy shelf, the walls would have been moldy and filthy, and the ceiling covered in cobwebs – hardly the sort of place you’d want to put your head. But because this closet was in a brand-new building, it was extremely clean. The ceiling was gleaming white and the sleek walls painted yellow without a smudge in sight. Partially due to the way the shelf was built, the whole arrangement imparted the feeling of a bunk on a ship. He even felt a strange temptation to try sleeping there.</p>
<p> From that night on he began to sleep in the closet. In this boarding house each room had a private door that locked from the inside, so he could carry on his eccentric behavior in peace without worrying about the maid coming in unannounced. When he bedded down there it felt better than he expected. He piled up four futons and softly rolled himself on top. It gave him a queer feeling to stare up and see the ceiling a mere two feet from his face. When he shut the sliding doors on the closet and peered at the thread of electric light coming through the gap, he felt like a character in a detective novel. It gave him a thrill to open the doors a crack and look at his room as a burglar would spy into a stranger’s room. He imagined all kinds of exciting scenarios and was fascinated by gazing. Sometimes during the day he would crawl into the largish rectangular box of the closet and lose himself in fantastic delusions while puffing away on his favorite cigarettes. At such moments white smoke billowed out from the gap between the sliding doors as if a fire had broken out in the closet.</p>
<p>However, after two or three days of this eccentric behavior, he discovered another strange thing. Around the third day or so, the easily bored Saburō grew weary of his bed in the closet, and with nothing better to do, he wrote graffiti on the walls or the wooden boards of the ceiling in the closet, wherever his hand could reach from where he lay. Then he noticed it. One of the ceiling boards directly above his head had not been nailed down or had otherwise come loose. When he tried lifting it with his hand to see what would happen, it came up without any difficulty. More curiously, when he withdrew his hand it snapped right back into place like a spring-driven mechanism, even though there weren’t any nails where they were supposed to be. It seemed that someone had fastened it in place from above.</p>
<p>If that was the case, it occurred to him, maybe there was something living up there, like a big rat snake. Saburō’s enthusiasm suddenly cooled, but since it would be a shame to give up so easily, he tried pushing against the board again. This time there wasn’t a strong feeling of resistance, but rather a dull rolling sound from above as he lifted the ceiling board. Things just kept getting stranger. He mustered all of his strength to push the ceiling board aside. In that instant there was a rattling sound and something came loose over his head. He quickly rolled to one side, which was good, he thought, because if he hadn’t he might have been seriously injured when the object landed on him. </p>
<p>“Huh, what a joke.”</p>
<p>He had expected something unusual, but when he got a good look at what hit him, he was truly surprised. It was smaller than a pickling stone, little more than a pebble. Eventually he realized there was nothing particularly mysterious about it. When the electricians crept through the crawlspace in the ceiling they purposely left one panel loose, but to keep dust and cobwebs from getting into the closet they weighed it down with a small stone. </p>
<p>It seemed to him outlandishly funny. But this comedy provided him with an opportunity – it turned out that Gōda Saburō had discovered a delightful new entertainment.</p>
<p>He lay there for some time gazing up at the hole in the ceiling, which brought to mind the entrance of a cave. His initial curiosity prompted him to wonder what on earth it looked like up there, so he cautiously poked his head into the cavity and took a look around. It was first thing in the morning and the roof was already illuminated with sunlight. Dozens of slender rays of light were shining out from the cracks as though innumerable search lights were roving across the recesses of the attic. It was inconceivably bright. </p>
<p>What first caught his eye was the ridgepole running lengthwise; long, thick and sinuous like a giant snake. Although it was brightly lit for an attic, he couldn’t see too far ahead. Since it was a long, narrow building, the ridgepole was of considerable length, but it got hazier as he looked further into the attic, making the ridgepole seem as though it were strung along into the distance. Like so many ribs of a giant snake, beams running perpendicular to the ridgepole poked out at an incline on both sides of the attic. This made for a great spectacle on its own, but there was also a considerable number of slender poles coming down from the beams to support the roof, making him feel as though he were gazing upon the interior of a limestone cavern.</p>
<p>“This is fantastic,” Saburō spontaneously murmured when he got his first real look around the attic. Where normal people would have seen something trifling, this pathological fellow, who took no interest in the ordinary world, conversely found an indescribable charm. </p>
<p>From that day on he began his “attic walks.” Day or night, whenever he had a spare moment, he silently stole around the ridgepole and timber beams like a cat burglar. Fortunately for him, because the Tōeikan had been built so recently there were no cobwebs, soot, or dust collecting in the attic, nor even the filthy traces of mice. There was no need to worry about his clothes, hands or feet getting dirty. Dressed only in shirtsleeves, he had a field day taking over the attic. It was springtime and even though it was an attic, it was neither too hot nor too cold.</p>
<p>— 3 —</p>
<p>As was the case with many lodging houses, the Tōeikan boarding house surrounded a central garden, its rooms lining up to form a square around the courtyard. Because the attic, too, followed this shape, there was no terminal point to the building. Saburō would enter the attic from the ceiling in his room and walk around in a circle, only to return to the starting point above his own room. </p>
<p>The walls in the rooms below were exceedingly sturdy and the doors were fitted with metal locks, so we can only guess what a liberating experience it was the first time he climbed up into the attic. He was free to walk over any room he chose with impunity. Scattered here and there were other rooms just like Saburō’s with weighted stones blocking the crawlspace, so if he were so inclined he could sneak into someone else’s room and steal their belongings. As I’ve explained, if you used the corridor of this square-shaped building to try such a thing, it not only meant that you could be seen from any direction, but you might run into another boarder or maid at any time, making it extremely risky. On the other hand, there was no danger whatsoever using the passage overhead in the attic.</p>
<p>The opportunity to spy on his neighbors and learn their secrets was now at his fingertips. It may have been a new building, but it was shoddily built with gaps scattered through the ceiling boards. You wouldn’t know it from standing inside a room, but when seen from the attic it was surprising how many gaps there were. On rare occasions, a knothole could also be found. </p>
<p>When he discovered the wondrous stage of the attic, that predilection for crime which at some point had subsided came rushing back into Saburō’s head. His earlier forays paled in comparison to the thrilling crimes he’d act out now with this attic for a stage. The mere thought of it sent him into raptures. “How is it possible such incredible excitement could be so near at hand, and all this time I didn’t realize it,” he wondered. He walked around this dark world like a demon, spying on each of the twenty or so inhabitants of the Tōeikan’s second floor and learning their secrets one after the other. This alone was enough to fill Saburō with delight. For the first time in ages he felt a reason to live.</p>
<p>To whet his appetite further when he went for an attic walk, he didn’t neglect to dress the part of a real criminal. He wore a tight-fitting dark brown homespun shirt and matching long tights – if he could have managed it, he would have preferred to wear a jet-black shirt like the lady spy Protéa he’d seen long ago in a movie,9 but unfortunately he had no such thing on hand, so he made the best of the situation. He put on tabi socks and gloves – this in spite of the fact that the timber in the attic was rough hewn, which practically eliminated the chance of leaving fingerprints behind – and in his hand... it was a pistol that he wanted but didn’t have, so instead he carried an electric flashlight.</p>
<p>Unlike daytime, there was a scant amount of light streaming in at dusk. He stealthily crept through the attic, taking care not to make a single peep in the dark, where he couldn’t see more than an inch in front of his face. Somehow he felt like it was he that had become a snake, and he felt strangely afraid in spite of himself. But whatever the cause of his fright, a blood-quickening thrill ran through him. 	</p>
<p>In this way he passed several days in ecstasy pursuing his attic walks. During that time, and in ways he hadn’t counted on, there were various happenings that delighted him. They were surely enough to fill the pages of a novel, but since they don’t directly concern the main subject of this story, I regret to say I will have to leave them be and only mention a few basic details. </p>
<p>I’m afraid it’s impossible if you’ve never actually done it to imagine the bizarre fascination of spying on others from the attic. Even if nothing special is going on below, watching people expose their true selves when they think no one else is around is worthwhile on its own merits. When he paid close attention, he was more than a bit surprised to discover certain people not only behaved differently when there were other people nearby than when they were alone, but their facial features completely change. What’s more, unlike the usual way of looking at faces in profile from the same horizontal point of view, he was looking down on them. The difference in the angle of the eye makes an ordinary room into a weird spectacle. Seen from above, the top of the human head and shoulders as well as the upper parts of book shelves, desk, bureau, hibachi brazier and so on are what stand out most to the naked eye. The walls, too, are almost invisible; instead, every item in the room is framed by tatami mats.</p>
<p>It didn’t matter if nothing was going on: besides the thrill of peeping, there were often comical, sad, and sometimes incredible spectacles transpiring below. There was a company employee with a penchant for fiery anti-capitalist rants who kept taking out the pay raise letter he’d just received from his briefcase when no one was around and then putting it back, reading it countless times with unabated pleasure. There was a certain stockjobber who wore his best kimono as everyday attire and put on the airs of a vainglorious millionaire, but just before bed he would take off the kimono he’d worn so casually during the daytime, and not only did he fastidiously fold it up and place it under his futon like a girl, whenever he saw a spot he’d assiduously lick it with his mouth, since the best way to remove small stains is supposedly to lick them. Such was his method of cleaning them. There was a pimply-faced boy, a baseball player at a certain university, who revealed cowardice unbecoming of an athlete. He’d leave a love letter to the maid on the tray after he finished his dinner, then think better of it and take it away, then put it back again. He did the same fidgety thing over and over again. The most daring of the lot took a woman home (was she a prostitute?) and did things I can’t write here – terrifying, maniacal acts. With no one the wiser, Saburō could spy to his heart’s desire.</p>
<p>He was also interested in conducting research on emotional conflicts between the boarders. Depending on who is interacting with whom, the same person can display a range of attitudes. A person who was chatting with a smile until a moment ago could go into the room next door and unleash a volley of curses like a wrathful devil; by the same token, there are people who flit about like bats paying lip service to others, but speak ill of those same people behind their back. When it came to female boarders –  there was a female art student who lived on the second floor of the Tōeikan – the situation became even more entertaining.</p>
<p>Never mind a “love triangle” – the fact that she was involved in a complicated, five- or six-sided relationship was obvious to everyone. Yet while none of the girl’s suitors knew her true intentions, the one person with a clear grasp of the situation was none other than that outsider, the stalker in the attic. There are many fairy tales about people who cover themselves with a magic cloak of invisibility and use the opportunity to spy on others, which was practically the same thing as Saburō lurking up in the ceiling. </p>
<p>It would have been a lot of fun creeping into other people’s rooms through the crawlspace to work mischief, but Saburō didn’t have the guts. On average about one room in three was the same as his, with a crawlspace held shut with weighted stones. While it wasn’t difficult to sneak into another boarder’s room, there was no way of knowing when the boarder might return. In addition, the windows were all shōji panels made of clear glass, so there was the danger of being spotted by someone outside. There was also no way to avoid making some kind of noise when he came down from the ceiling panels into a closet and opened the sliding doors to enter the room, or when he climbed up the closet to return to the attic. If a sound was heard by someone in the corridor or the room next door, that would be the end of him.</p>
<p>Then something happened late one night. Saburō finished one circuit of his attic walk and was following one beam after another back to his room, which was on the far side of the garden, when he discovered a faint gap he’d never noticed before in a corner of the ceiling. It was a cloud–shaped aperture no more than two inches in diameter, and from it a ray of light thinner than thread was streaming out. Wondering what it was, he cautiously took out his flashlight to investigate. There was a largish knot in the wood, more than halfway separated from the surrounding board, but it somehow held together and avoided becoming a knothole by a hair’s breadth.</p>
<p>If he just scraped the knot with his nail it looked as though it would easily come loose. Looking down through an open knothole to make sure the room’s occupant was sleeping, Saburō was careful not to make any noise as he methodically removed the knot. Conveniently for him, the knothole was shaped like a wineglass tapering toward the bottom, so if he plugged it back up the way it was, nothing could fall through, nor would anyone notice the large spyhole overhead.</p>
<p>Delighted by this fortuitous turn of events, he peered down into the knothole. Unlike the other gaps which, however long, were never more than a few fractions of an inch wide, this one was more than an inch wide at its narrowest point, so it allowed him to easily survey the entire room. Saburō loitered there in spite of himself and gazed at the room. It was entirely by accident, but of all the boarders at the Tōeikan, this room belonged to the one Saburō detested the most: a dental school graduate named Endō, who worked in the city as a dental assistant. Endō had an unpleasantly flat, disgusting face that was even more sickening to look at as it slept below him.</p>
<p>He was absurdly fastidious and his room was much tidier than those of the other boarders. The arrangement of stationery on his desk, the organization of books on the bookshelves, the way his futon was spread out, the alarm clock laid by the side of his pillow, which looked to be imported and was of a design Saburō had never seen before, the lacquer cigarette case, the colored glass ashtray – they attested to the fact that their owner was extremely fond of neatness and order. Endō even adopted a correct sleeping posture. The only thing out of place in this scene was his broad, open mouth and thunderous snoring.</p>
<p>Saburō wrinkled his eyebrows as if he’d witnessed something dirty and stared at Endō’s face. His face was what you might call pretty. Of course to hear Endō tell it, his looks were popular with the ladies. But what stupid, elongated features he had. He had a thick head of hair and a long face, but he also had a shallow forehead with a widow’s peak, small eyebrows, squinty eyes with wrinkles at the corners as through he were always laughing, and a long nose and weirdly broad mouth. Saburō couldn’t stand his mouth. The area under his nose formed a ledge and his upper and lower jaws jutted out – those parts made a strange contrast with his pallid face – and his largish purple lips were spread apart. He must have had sinus congestion since his nose was always stuffed up and he breathed through his wide open mouth. His snoring was no doubt caused by this nasal malady. </p>
<p>Whenever Saburō looked at Endō, a creepy-crawly feeling went up his spine and he suddenly wanted to punch him in his flat face.</p>
<p>— 4 —</p>
<p>While Saburō was staring at Endō’s face a strange thought occurred to him. If he were to spit down the hole, wouldn’t it land right in Endō’s wide-open mouth? It was as if Endō’s mouth had been custom-made to lie smack dab under the knothole. Saburō had weird tastes, so he took the drawstring out of the Western-style underpants he wore beneath his tights and dangled it from the top of the knothole. He put the drawstring to his eye and looked down it as though it were the sight of a rifle to see if he was right. It was an amazing coincidence. The drawstring, the knothole and Endō’s mouth lined up perfectly. In other words, he knew if he spit down the hole, it would definitely land in Endō’s mouth.</p>
<p>To actually spit down the hole was out of the question, so Saburō plugged the knothole back up and got up to leave, but at that moment a terrifying thought flashed through his mind. In the pitch-black gloom of the attic he turned white as a sheet and shuddered in spite of himself. His thought was of murdering Endō, against whom he bore no real grudge. </p>
<p>It wasn’t just that he bore no grudge against Endō: he had barely known him for more than two or three weeks. By coincidence they had moved in on the same day, and as a result they’d visited one another’s rooms a few times, but they never had any serious dealings. As I’ve just said, the fact that Endō’s looks and behavior were so irritating they made Saburō want to punch him in the face surely contributed to the reason why he wanted to kill Endō, but the main motive behind Saburō’s thinking wasn’t his character, but simply that he wanted to kill for the sake of killing. We’ve already noted that Saburō’s mental state was extremely abnormal and he harbored pathological criminal tendencies. The crime he found most attractive was murder, so it wasn’t entirely by accident that such a thought would arise in his mind. It was only that until now even if murderous desires frequently occurred to him, he was afraid of getting caught, and he never thought for a minute about going through with it.</p>
<p>In the present situation with Endō, however, there was no reason to fear being suspected or uncovered, so it seemed possible to commit the murder. Provided there was no danger to himself, if the victim never saw him or knew who he was, Saburō wouldn’t hesitate to act. Or rather, the more barbaric the murder the more his bizarre desires could be gratified. So why did Saburō believe he could murder Endō and escape detection? Some kind of answer can be found in the following circumstances.</p>
<p>It was four or five days after they moved into the Tōeikan. Saburō went to a neighborhood café with a fellow boarder with whom he’d just gotten acquainted. Endō showed up at the same café and the three of them sat down at the same table for a drink – Saburō, who detested liquor, drank coffee – and they were all having a good time. They headed back to the boarding house together, but the slightly tipsy Endō insisted, “Hey, why don’t you come to my room,” and dragged the two of them along to his room. Endō was enjoying himself, and, not caring how late it had become, called the maid to make tea and renewed their boisterous conversation from the café. From that night on, Saburō developed a hatred of him. At the time, Endō was licking his florid, plum-red lips and boasting about his exploits. </p>
<p>“At one point I made a love suicide pact with this woman. I was still in school, you see, and I went to medical school. It was a piece of cake to get the drugs. So I prepared the morphine for the two of us to have a painless death, and, listen to this, we headed off for Shiobara.” 10</p>
<p>Endō rose unsteadily, walked over to the closet, and opened the fusuma with a clatter. From the inside of a wicker trunk stored there he produced a brown-colored bottle scarcely larger than a man’s pinky and held it up to show them. There was only a tiny amount of some kind of white substance at the bottom. </p>
<p>“This is it. A miniscule pinch is enough to kill two people... But you can’t say a word about it, not to anyone else.”</p>
<p>He prattled on and on that night without pause, but what came unbidden into Saburō’s mind now was that talk about the drug. </p>
<p>“If I sprinkled that drug from the knothole in the ceiling, I could kill a man! What a fantastic idea, beyond anyone’s wildest dreams! It will be the perfect murder.” </p>
<p>This brilliant idea transported him to utter ecstasy. When he really thought about it, no matter how dramatic the method, he knew it was scarcely likely to succeed, and while there were surely many other and easier ways of committing murder without going to so much trouble, he was captivated by an abnormal fixation and no doubt was unable to think of anything else. In his mind nothing but convenient rationalizations for his plan floated up one after another. </p>
<p>The first step was to steal the morphine. But that was no big deal. If he visited Endō’s room and got into a long chat, sooner or later Endō would have to go to the toilet and leave the room. He’d wait for his chance and then steal the small brown-colored bottle from that wicker trunk he knew on sight. Endō couldn’t always have a need to search its contents, so surely he wouldn’t notice for two or three days. Even if he did realize it was gone, he’d obtained it illegally so he couldn’t bring its theft to light. If Saburō did it cleverly, Endō wouldn’t have a clue who stole it from him.</p>
<p>But wouldn’t it be easier to sneak into the room from the ceiling without going to such lengths? No, no, it would be too dangerous. As I’ve said before, there was no way of knowing when the room’s inhabitant would return, and there was a risk of being seen from the outside through the glass shōji. Besides that, in the first place Endō’s room did not have a crawlspace held in place by weighted stones as Saburō’s did. How could he dare take a risk by removing the nailed-down ceiling panels to sneak in? </p>
<p>Well then, once he got a hold of this drug, it would be sufficient to dissolve it in water and let it drip down into Endō’s mouth, which would be gaping open thanks to his nasal congestion. His only fear was whether he would swallow enough of it, but that was fine, too. There was such a small amount of the drug that if he dissolved it thoroughly, a few drops would be enough, and in a deep sleep he wouldn’t even notice. Even if he did notice there would be no time to cough it up. Regardless of the fact that morphine is a harsh drug, as Saburō knew well, the dosage was miniscule, and if he mixed in some sugar, there would be no cause for alarm. No one would imagine a stunt like dripping poison from the ceiling, so if Endō managed to spit it out, there was no reason to look for him up there. </p>
<p>Yet how well the drug took effect depended on Endō’s constitution, and if it was too much or too little, wasn’t there a question that he might just suffer without dying? That was a problem. Of course it would be extremely unfortunate if that happened, but there was no danger to Saburō personally. He would plug up the knothole the way it had been before, and since no dust had accumulated yet in the attic, there would be no trace of him. He would wear gloves to avoid leaving fingerprints. Should anyone deduce that the lethal drug had been dripped from the ceiling, it would be impossible to say whose work it had been. His acquaintance with Endō was brief and it was a fact that no one knew of any trouble between them that might lead Saburō to have a grudge against him or have a reason to hate him. But it wasn’t necessary to think that far ahead; there would be no way for anyone to tell what angle the drug had come from while Endō was fast asleep.</p>
<p>This was the convoluted logic that passed through Saburō’s mind as he made his way back to his room from the attic. You, dear reader, have no doubt realized that even if all of these details went according to plan, there was still a critical error in his plans. But, strangely, until he was on the verge of carrying it out, it didn’t occur to him.</p>
<p>— 5 —</p>
<p>When a convenient opportunity arose four or five days later, Saburō paid a visit to Endō. In the intervening time he had repeatedly mulled over his plan until he determined that there was no risk involved for him. Nevertheless, he came up with various other provisions. For instance, he considered how to dispose of the medicine bottle.</p>
<p>If he were able to murder Endō as planned, he decided to drop the bottle down the knothole. He hoped to obtain two benefits by doing so. First, there would be no need to conceal such a valuable piece of evidence as the bottle from being discovered; second, should the medicine bottle be found lying at the side of the dead man, anyone would surely conclude Endō had committed suicide. In addition, the fellow who had heard his boastful stories along with Saburō could certainly testify that the bottle belonged to Endō himself. What made things work even more in his favor was that Endō made sure to lock his door every night before going to sleep. Not only the door, but the windows and the safe in his room were locked, making it impossible for someone to enter from the outside.</p>
<p>That day Saburō exercised extreme restraint, looking the loathsome Endō in the face and chatting with him for a long while about various topics. As they were talking, he had the highly dangerous urge to hint at his murderous intentions and scare Endō out of his wits, but he managed to hold it in check. </p>
<p>“Soon enough,” he thought, “I’m going to kill you in such a way that not a shred of evidence will be left behind. You won’t be making idle chit-chat like a girl much longer, either. Go ahead and talk your head off while you can.”</p>
<p>Saburō silently repeated these words in his heart as he watched Endō’s large mouth perpetually in motion. It gave him no shortage of pleasure to think that in short order this man was going to be a bloated, white corpse.</p>
<p>Right according to plan, in the midst of their conversation Endō got up to use the toilet. It was around 10:00 p.m. Saburō was careful to check the windows so no one saw him from outside and made sure not to make a sound, but he quickly opened the closet and searched for the medicine bottle inside the wicker trunk. He’d seen where it was hidden once before so it was no trouble to locate it. In spite of that his heart was pounding and a cold sweat ran down his sides. In point of fact stealing this bottle was the most dangerous phase of his plan. Endō could unexpectedly return at any time and there was no telling who might catch a glimpse of him. On that score this is what he planned to do. If he was caught in the act, or even if he wasn’t, if Endō discovered the medicine bottle was missing – by paying close attention he’d know when it happened, especially thanks to the peephole in the ceiling he had as his secret weapon – he would forego his murderous intentions. Then it would only be a stolen medicine bottle, not a capital crime.</p>
<p>In any case, in the end he was able to get away clean with the medicine bottle, without anyone seeing him. As soon as Endō came back from the toilet he broke off their conversation and returned to his room. He pulled down the curtains on the window to completely shut out prying eyes, locked the door and sat down at his desk. His heart in his throat, he took the precious medicine bottle from his breast pocket and unflinchingly stared at it.</p>
<p>MORPHINE (0.X g.)</p>
<p>It was probably Endō’s writing. The letters were inscribed on a small label. Saburō had read a book on toxicology and knew a bit about morphine, but this was his first time to actually see it with his own eyes. He held the bottle in front of the electric light and looked inside. He could clearly see through the glass a tiny pinch of foggy white powder: about half of what was needed to fill a miniature measuring spoon. It was difficult to imagine this was all it took to kill a person. </p>
<p>Naturally Saburō lacked an accurate scale to measure it, so he had no choice but to calculate the quantity trusting in what Endō had said. At the time Endō had been under the influence of alcohol, but Saburō didn’t discount it as nonsense. He knew the amount printed on the label was twice the lethal dosage, so he didn’t have the slightest suspicion it wouldn’t do the trick.</p>
<p>He set the bottle down on the desk and placed it alongside the bottle of sugar and alcohol he’d prepared. Like a pharmacist he precisely and ardently began compounding the mixture. It looked as though the other boarders had all gone to bed, and a hush fell over the environs. Carefully he took a matchstick soaked in alcohol and let one drop after another fall into the bottle, his own breathing reverberating weirdly like the sighs of a devil. We can well imagine how this gratified Saburō’s perverse inclinations. Indeed, what he envisioned before his eyes was a bubbling cauldron of poison inside a gloom-shrouded cave and the figure of a fearsome, cackling old witch from the fairy tales of old.</p>
<p>Yet, on the other hand, from then on an utterly unanticipated feeling akin to terror sprang up from a dark corner of his heart. What’s more, little by little it grew with the passing of time.</p>
<p>Murder cannot be hid long; a man’s son may, but in the end truth will out.</p>
<p>Those ominous words he recalled from someone in Shakespeare were seared on Saburō’s brain like a dazzling light. While he was absolutely convinced his plan would not fail, there was nothing he could do to stop his unease from steadily growing.</p>
<p>Murdering another human being against whom he held no grudge simply for the pleasure of killing – was this the height of sanity or was he possessed by the devil or just plain crazy? What on earth was wrong with him that he didn’t see the wickedness in his own heart? </p>
<p>Unaware how late it had become, he sat lost in thought for a long time before the bottle of compounded poison. Or rather, he considered abandoning his plan. It’s possible that he decided not to go through with it any number of times. But in the end he couldn’t resist the attraction of murder.</p>
<p>However, as he sat there thinking over this and that, a certain fatal reality flashed in his mind. </p>
<p>Suddenly Saburō let out a muffled giggle, as if unable to help himself, yet still mindful of the quietude of his surroundings. </p>
<p>“You idiot,” he thought. “You good-for-nothing clown! You thought you were so clever devising this plan, huh, but your mind must’ve been in a stupor, unable to tell the difference between coincidence and a sure thing. What made you think just because Endō’s gaping mouth was right under the knothole once that it will be the next time, too? Nope, there’s no way it’s going to happen like that again.”</p>
<p>In actuality it had been an exceedingly foolish mistake. The point of departure for this plan of his was nothing more than a grandiose delusion. How was it that it hadn’t occurred to him until now? It was a real mystery. I’m afraid it was proof of the real shortcomings in that would-be brilliant mind of his. In any event, when he came to this realization, on the one hand he felt a tremendous sense of disappointment, but at the same time, on the other hand he felt a strange sense of relief.</p>
<p>“Thanks to this turn of events I won’t have to commit a horrific murder after all. Whew, that saves the day,” he said to himself. From the next day on, every time he went on an attic walk he opened the knothole to which he’d become so attached and didn’t forget to monitor Endō’s movements. In part he was worried and wanted to know whether Endō had noticed that the morphine had been stolen, but you couldn’t deny he was also desperate to see if Endō’s mouth accidentally fell directly under the knothole again. The truth is that each time he went walking the medicine bottle never left his pocket. </p>
<p>— 6 —</p>
<p>One night it happened – it was about ten days after Saburō began his attic walks: ten days in which no one took the least notice of the extraordinary pains he took many times a day to creep around overhead. The words diligence and care don’t come close to doing it justice. Once again Saburō prowled the ceiling above Endō’s room. With a feeling like he was drawing lots, not knowing if it would be good or ill fortune, he was hopeful that maybe, just maybe, today would be his lucky day. Saying a prayer to the gods he ventured a look through the knothole.</p>
<p>Well, his eyes must have been deceiving him, for what did he see? Endō was sleeping in exactly the same pose as before, his snoring mouth directly below the knothole. Saburō repeatedly rubbed his eyes to double check, and withdrew the drawstring from his underpants to measure it by sight, but there was no mistake. The drawstring traveled in a straight line from the hole to Endō’s mouth. He could barely restrain himself from involuntarily letting out a cry. The elation that finally the moment had arrived blended with an unspeakable fear. He was taken by a weird excitement that cast a pallor over him in the gloom.</p>
<p>He took the poison bottle from his pocket, his solitary hand trembling as he removed the stopper and used the drawstring to line up the bottle – oh, the feeling was indescribable! – and let ten drops fall. Drip, drip, drip... At last he’d done it. He swiftly closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“He must’ve noticed, I’m sure he must’ve noticed. Any second now, oh, any second now, he’s going to scream bloody murder.”</p>
<p>He was so certain of it he would have clapped both his hands over his ears if they had been free. </p>
<p>But contrary to his expectations, there wasn’t a sound from Endō below. Saburō definitely saw the morphine solution drip into his mouth, there was no mistaking that. But what was he to make of the silence. He hesitantly opened his eyes, and peered into the knothole. No doubt Endō had just finished making inaudible sounds with his mouth and rubbing his lips with both hands. Or maybe he was still snoring away. As they say, things sometimes go better than we expect. Sleeping like a stone, Endō betrayed no sign of having imbibed the lethal solution.</p>
<p>Saburō stared at the piteous face and unmoving body of his victim as if to devour it. It felt like an interminably long interval, at least two or three hours, that he waited there, but in fact it was something less than twenty minutes before Endō’s eyes opened with a start. Half-awake, he strangely looked around the room. As if overcome with vertigo he twisted his neck and rubbed his eyes, all the while babbling nonsense in a delirious state and gesticulating crazily. But then, finally, his head fell back onto the pillow and he lapsed back into a deep sleep.</p>
<p>By and by the depth of his slumber weakened and his body ceased all movement. As though he were drunk, he turned bright red and beads of sweat broke out on his nose and forehead. A terrifying life-and-death struggle was now taking place inside his sleeping body. The thought made Saburō’s hair stand on end.</p>
<p>When some time had passed, his flushed red face slowly cooled. Just when he thought it had gone white as a sheet it began to take on a bluish cast. Before he knew it, the snoring had stopped; somehow the pace of inhalations and exhalations dropped off... His chest ceased to move, and Saburō was sure it was the decisive moment, but a little later on, as if his body were remembering something, his lips quivered, and a dull respiration returned. This happened two or three more times and then it was over. He was no longer moving. A curious smile unlike any of this world played on his face, which had slid heavily from the pillow. He had, as they say, “become a Buddha.”</p>
<p>Holding his breath and clenching his sweaty palms, Saburō stared at the body, and for the first time let out a sigh. He’d become a murderer. Still, you had to admit it was a peaceful way to die. His victim had not cried out once, nor had an anguished look crossed his face: he snored his way to death.</p>
<p>“What the hell. Is murder such a piece of cake?”</p>
<p>Saburō somehow felt disappointed. In the world of his imagination there was no greater thrill than murder, but now that he looked at it, it was no different from ordinary, everyday things. </p>
<p>“If murder is this easy,” he thought, “I’ll kill another bunch of people, goddamit.” </p>
<p>Despite having thoughts like this, his addled mind was riveted by an indescribable terror. He felt nauseated by his own appearance staring at the corpse through the knothole. The muscles in his neck throbbed and his ears suddenly picked up the sound of someone slowly, ever so slowly, calling out his name. Without any conscious thought he took his eyes off the knothole and fumbled in the darkness, disoriented from having stared too long into the brightness of the hole. Yellow stars big and small danced one after another before his eyes. If he looked carefully he thought he could see Endō’s florid, misshapen lips behind them.</p>
<p>In spite of it all his original plan had succeeded without a hitch. He dripped the remains of the lethal solution in the medicine bottle down the knothole – there were still several dozen drops left over – closed up the hole, and turned on the flashlight to check the attic on the off-chance any evidence had been left behind. When he was sure he hadn’t overlooked anything, he hastily fled back to his room using the beams to guide his way.</p>
<p>“Whew, it’s finally over.”</p>
<p>His mind and body oddly numb, Saburō couldn’t shake the feeling he’d forgotten something and he began to get dressed inside the closet. That was when he suddenly wondered about the drawstring he’d used as a measure. Could he possible have forgotten it up there? In a panic he checked around his waist. It was nowhere to be found. Quickly growing more panicked, he searched his whole body. He wondered how he could have lost something like that. Hadn’t he put it in his shirt pocket? Thankfully, and with great relief, he started to take the drawstring and flashlight from his pocket when he let out a gasp of surprise to find another object in his pocket... It was the small cork from the medicine bottle. </p>
<p>Earlier, when he had let the lethal solution drip down into the room, he’d deliberately put the stopper in his pocket for safekeeping, knowing what a disaster is would be to lose it. He knew what he was doing at the time, but now it seemed he’d dropped the bottle without the stopper. It was a small thing, but if he let it go it could lead to the discovery of the real crime. He reassured himself that he all he had to do was to return to the attic and drop it down the knothole.</p>
<p>That night, by the time Saburō lay down to rest – as a precaution he’d already decided against sleeping in the closet – it was three in the morning. Even then he was too nervous to fall asleep. If he could lose track of something like that stopper, there may have been other missteps along the way, too. He was beside himself with worry. He forced his disturbed mind to calm down and reviewed his behavior that night, retracing his steps one by one to see if he could figure out if he’d neglected anything. At least in his mind, however, he wouldn’t find anything. </p>
<p>He stayed up until daybreak thinking about it until eventually he could hear footsteps in the corridor from the early risers amongst the boarders going to the washbasin. Then he suddenly got up and started making preparations for a trip. He was terrified waiting for Endō’s corpse to be discovered. He wondered what kind of attitude he should adopt when the news broke. It would be a disaster if he was suspected later as a result of any strange behavior. He decided it would safest to go away for a while, but it would be even more odd if he left without having any breakfast. “Oh, that’s right, I’m forgetting something,” he thought, and the next thing he knew he’d climbed back under the covers.</p>
<p>Saburō spent the two hours or so until breakfast with his heart in his throat. He ate in a flurry, and fortunately he was out the door before anything happened. He left the boarding house without any particular destination in mind, but just wandered from neighborhood to neighborhood to kill time.</p>
<p>— 7 —</p>
<p>In the end his plan was a marvelous success. When he came back in the afternoon, Endō’s corpse had been carted away and the police’s investigation was long since over. Not a soul doubted Endō’s suicide, and the cops on the case had just gone through the motions of conducting an investigation before taking their leave.</p>
<p>No one had any idea why Endō committed suicide, but judging from his usual behavior it was likely the result of being blinded by love – on this count everyone’s opinion was unanimous. In fact, it came out that a girl recently broke his heart. Now, for a man like him muttering, “Broken-hearted, I’m broken-hearted,” was just a kind of pet phrase without any larger significance, but without any other cause to fall back on, this was the one everyone settled on.</p>
<p>Regardless of whether there was due cause, there was no doubt what took place was a suicide. The door and windows were locked from the inside and the medicine bottle had fallen at the side of his pillow. Since it was recognized as belonging to him, there were no grounds for misgivings. The idiotic notion that the lethal solution might have dripped from the ceiling never occurred to anyone.	</p>
<p>Still Saburō didn’t feel altogether at ease and for the entire day he was on tenterhooks. Eventually one day passed, then another, and he not only became more relaxed, but a newfound confidence in his abilities emerged.</p>
<p>“What’s going on?” he thought. “As usual, I’m in control. Look, none of you living here under the same roof has a clue there’s a terrifying murderer in your midst.”</p>
<p>He adopted this attitude thinking no one in the world knew of his hidden, unpunished crime. “The net of heaven’s justice may seem easy to evade, but it never fails to catch the wicked. That saying may be nothing more than an old bit of political propaganda, or a common superstition,” he thought. “The truth is, if you are really brilliant, you get away with any crime forever.” However, sometimes at night he imagined Endō’s dead face flickering in front of his eyes, and he felt queasy. Since that fateful night he’d put an end to his attic walks, but this was only a problem in his heart, and eventually he got over it. If the crime wasn’t discovered, really, wasn’t it enough by now?</p>
<p>It happened exactly on the third day after Endō died. Saburō had finished eating dinner and was cleaning his teeth with a toothpick, humming a song, when there was a knock at the door. It was Akechi Kogorō, whom he hadn’t seen in a long time, coming to pay him a visit.</p>
<p>“Hey, old chap.”</p>
<p>“It’s been a while.”</p>
<p>They casually greeted each other like old friends, but Saburō couldn’t help feeling a bit nervy at the amateur detective’s unexpected visit. </p>
<p>“Someone at this boarding house took poison and died, right?” </p>
<p>No sooner did he sit down than Akechi straightaway brought up the very topic Saburō wanted to avoid. He must have heard about the suicide from someone, and since Saburō fortuitously lived in the same place, his innate interest in detective work led him to Saburō’s door.	</p>
<p>“Oh, that. It was morphine. I was out when the big commotion occurred, so I’m not too clear on the details, but I hear it was an act of passion.”</p>
<p>Saburō didn’t want to let on that he was trying to avoid the subject, so he tried to put an interested look on his face when he answered. </p>
<p>“What kind of fellow was he?”</p>
<p>Akechi wasted no time asking another question. For some time they discussed Endō’s hereditary disposition, his death, and the method of committing suicide. Especially at first Saburō nervously answered Akechi’s questions, but as he grew more comfortable, he gradually became more cunning until he felt like mocking Akechi.</p>
<p>“What do you make of it, old chap? Is it possibly a homicide? Well, there’s no grounds for it, but you know, sometimes what everyone believes is a suicide turns out, in fact, to be murder.”</p>
<p>As he let the words slip from his mouth, Saburō sneered to himself, “Well, well, even the famous detective hasn’t got it all figured out.” The pleasure it gave him was exquisite. </p>
<p>“We can’t rule that out, either. As a matter of fact, when I heard about this from a friend of mine, the cause of death sounded rather vague. I wonder, would it be possible to have a look at this fellow Endō’s room?”</p>
<p>“It shouldn’t be a problem,” Saburō responded rather confidently. “A friend of Endō’s from the same hometown lives next door. Endō’s father asked him to take care of his things. If I tell him about you, I’m sure he’d be happy to show you.”</p>
<p>At that they decided to go to Endō’s room. As they were walking down the corridor, Saburō was suddenly struck by an ominous premonition.</p>
<p>“It’s truly a bizarre turn of events,” he thought, “when the murderer himself takes the detective on a tour of the crime scene.”</p>
<p>He had to refrain from grinning at the thought of it. In his entire life, Saburō had never felt such a sense of exaltation. “Hey, boss!” he almost wanted to shout at himself, so perfectly did he inhabit the role of the villain. </p>
<p>Endō’s friend – Kitamura by name – was the one who’d testified that Endō had been broken-hearted. He knew Akechi’s reputation very well, and gladly opened the room for him. Endō’s father had just came up from the country that very afternoon and taken care of the private memorial service held before the public funeral. All of Endō’s belongings were still there, unpacked, just as they had been.</p>
<p>Endō’s unnatural death had been discovered after Kitamura left for work, so he did not know how it had looked at that time, but he gave a detailed explanation pieced together from conversations with the other boarders. Pretending to have no connection to the crime, Saburō, too, chimed in with the gossip he’d heard.</p>
<p>Akechi listened to their explanations and looked around the room with the studied air of the amateur detective before abruptly taking an interest in the alarm clock on the desk. Whatever he was thinking, he gazed at it for a long time. Perhaps the eccentric design caught his eye.</p>
<p>“This is an alarm clock, right?”</p>
<p>“Yes, that’s correct,” Kitamura volubly replied. “It was Endō’s prized possession. He was a punctual fellow, and to make sure it went off in the morning at six o’clock, he made sure to wind it every night. You know, the sound of the bell was loud enough to wake me up next door. The day he died was no different. That morning I heard the alarm go off as usual, and never in my wildest dreams did I imagine something like this could have happened.”</p>
<p>When he heard this, Akechi twirled a strand of his long hair around his finger, which somehow gave him a look of intense concentration. </p>
<p>“You’re certain the alarm rang that morning?”</p>
<p>“Yes, absolutely.”</p>
<p>“Did you mention this to this police?”</p>
<p>“No... But why do you ask?”</p>
<p>“Why? Well, don’t you think it’s strange for a person who decides to commit suicide that night to wind his alarm clock for the next morning?”</p>
<p>“Well, when you put it that way, yes, it’s odd.”</p>
<p>Kitamura’s carelessness had made him overlook this point until now. Indeed, he showed no sign of having clearly absorbed the meaning of Akechi’s words. But you couldn’t say his thinking was unreasonable. The door was locked, the medicine bottle was lying beside the dead man’s body and all the other details pointed toward the clear conclusion that Endō had taken his own life.</p>
<p>When Saburō heard this exchange, he was so surprised he felt as though the ground had begun to crumble without warning beneath his feet. He berated himself for foolishly bringing Akechi there. </p>
<p>Akechi proceeded to inspect the room in minute detail. Of course he did not forget to examine the ceiling. He tested each panel in the ceiling by tapping it to see if there was any evidence of where a person might have entered the room. To Saburō’s relief, even Akechi appeared unaware of his novel use of the knothole to drip down the lethal solution, but which was now plugged up. Once Akechi made sure none of the ceiling panels were loose, he did not pry any further.</p>
<p>At last the day ended without any particular discoveries. After Akechi looked over Endō’s room, he returned to Saburō’s place, and they had a long chat about various topics before he took his leave. However, during their conversation, we can’t overlook the following exchange. At first glance it may seem extremely trivial, but in fact it is of the utmost significance to the conclusion of this story. </p>
<p>Akechi took a cigarette out and lit it. Then out of the blue he made an unexpected observation.</p>
<p>“All this time you haven’t had a single cigarette: did you quit?”</p>
<p>Saburō hadn’t realized it, but when pressed he saw that he had practically forgotten about his fondness for cigarettes in the past two or three days and hadn’t had a single smoke the whole time. </p>
<p>“That’s strange. I completely gave it up. Even seeing you smoke like that doesn’t make me want to, even a little bit.”</p>
<p>“How long has it been?” </p>
<p>“Now that I think of it, I haven’t had a smoke in two or three days. That’s right: I’m sure I bought this pack on Sunday, so it’s been three whole days without a single cigarette. I wonder what’s happened to me?”</p>
<p>“Well, so you’ve been this way ever since the day Endō died.”</p>
<p>Saburō was dumbfounded when he heard Akechi’s rejoinder. He couldn’t believe there was a causal relationship between Endō’s death and his having stopped smoking, so he simply laughed it off. But later, when he thought it over, he realized it wasn’t an insignificant funny story. Mysteriously, Saburō’s aversion to smoking persisted thereafter as well.</p>
<p>— 8 —</p>
<p>From that day onward, somehow Saburō couldn’t stop thinking about the alarm clock, and couldn’t sleep at night. Even if suicide was ruled out for Endō, there wasn’t a shred of evidence he was the true culprit. That should have been enough to reassure him, but because the person in the know was Akechi, he couldn’t set his mind at ease.</p>
<p>However, half a month slipped by without incident. Akechi, about whom he’d been so worried, never once came back.</p>
<p>“Whew, I think I’m finally out of the woods.”</p>
<p>Saburō finally gave himself permission to let his guard down. Occasionally he suffered from terrifying dreams, but for the most part the days passed pleasantly enough. What especially pleased him was that, strangely enough, ever since the murder various pastimes for which he hadn’t felt the least bit of enthusiasm had become entertaining again. That’s why he spent almost every day going out and playing around. </p>
<p>One day when Saburō had been out until past dark, he came back to his room around ten o’clock. Deciding to go to sleep, he casually pulled open the sliding doors of the closet to take out the futon. </p>
<p>“Wha—!” He suddenly let out a frightful cry and staggered two or three steps backwards.</p>
<p>Was he dreaming? Or had he gone mad? There, in the closet, was Endō’s head, his hair disheveled, hanging upside down in the wan light from the ceiling. </p>
<p>Saburō at once started to flee, but when he reached the door it occurred to him that perhaps in a flight of the imagination he’d mistaken something for Endō’s head, and fearfully made his way back for one more look. Cautiously peering into the closet, he realized that not only was it no mistake, but the head was laughing at him! </p>
<p>Saburō once more let out a scream, ran for the entrance and threw open the sliding screen doors, desperate to escape that very instant. </p>
<p>“Gōda, my good fellow! Gōda!” </p>
<p>The next thing he knew, the head was insistently calling Saburō’s name from inside the closet.</p>
<p>“It’s me, it’s me, I tell you. There’s no need to run away.”</p>
<p>It wasn’t Endō’s voice, but it was somehow familiar; and since it was another person’s voice, he stopped in his tracks and hesitantly turned back to look.</p>
<p>“Sorry about that.” </p>
<p>Just as Saburō himself had done so many times in the past, down from the closet ceiling alighted none other than Akechi Kogorō.</p>
<p>“Pardon me for giving you a fright.”</p>
<p>Dressed in Western attire, Akechi emerged from the closet with a smile playing on his lips. “I wanted to try imitating you for a change.”</p>
<p>This was a terrifying reality: far more frightening, in fact, than any ghost. There was no doubt in his mind that one way or the other Akechi had figured it out. </p>
<p>There are honestly no words to describe the feelings Saburō experienced at that moment. All his affairs spun around in his head like a windmill. He stood there with a blank look as though none of this had occurred to him and stared back at Akechi.</p>
<p>“Without further ado, here’s the button to your shirt,” began Akechi in a crisp, businesslike manner. In his hand was a black button which he thrust before Saburō’s eyes.</p>
<p>“I asked around among the other boarders, but no-one was missing a button like this. Oh yes, it’s from that shirt of yours. I believe the second button down is missing?”</p>
<p>Saburō looked down at his chest in surprise, and sure enough, there was a button missing. He hadn’t paid one whit of attention when it fell off. </p>
<p>“It’s a very peculiar shape for a shirt button, so it must be yours. Incidentally, where do you think I found it? In the attic. It was right above that fellow Endō’s room.”</p>
<p>Saburō still had not gotten his mind around the fact that if he had lost a button, why hadn’t he noticed it? Hadn’t he done a careful job looking around with the flashlight that night?</p>
<p>“It was you, wasn’t it, who killed Endō?”</p>
<p>Akechi grinned nonchalantly – his smile at a time like this made Saburō feel even worse – and closely observing Saburō’s confused eyes, which didn’t know which way to look, Akechi spoke these words as if to finish him off. </p>
<p>Saburō knew he was done for. No matter how skillful Akechi’s detections were, they were still just guesses, which left him plenty of room to come up with his own defense. But when presented with this unanticipated piece of evidence, there was nothing he could do.</p>
<p>Saburō now had an expression on his face like a child on the verge of tears, and just stood there dumb as a statue for what seemed like an eternity. From time to time he could see things from the distant past rise up like a phantom before his dazed, filmy eyes like things that had happened when he was a schoolboy.</p>
<p>Two hours later they hadn’t moved an inch from where they were standing, still facing one another in Saburō’s room. </p>
<p>“Thanks for confessing the truth to me,” Akechi said at last. “Don’t worry, I have no intention of reporting you to the police. But just to be certain, tell me if my judgment was correct. As you know, my only interest is getting to the truth. The rest is immaterial. By the way, I don’t have one shred of proof you committed the crime. The button from your shirt?” Akechi burst out laughing. “That was my trick. I suspected you wouldn’t admit it without some kind of physical evidence. When I visited you the last time I noticed the second button on your shirt was missing, so I decided to use that to my advantage. This button? I found it at a button shop. Hardly anyone notices when a button comes off and you were in such a state of excitement I was quite sure it would do the job.</p>
<p>“As you know, I started to suspect you were behind Endō’s suicide because of that alarm clock. Afterwards I paid a visit to the district chief of police, who gave me a detailed summary filed at the time by the investigating officer. I learned that the bottle of morphine had fallen into a cigarette box and spilled all over the rolling tobacco. I had heard Endō was extremely fastidious. Doesn’t it seem unnatural for him to take the trouble to prepare to die on the floor, but then drop the bottle in a tobacco box and spill its contents on top of that?</p>
<p>“That’s when my suspicions deepened, but then I suddenly realized you’d stopped smoking the day Endō died. Isn’t it amazing how these two things coincidentally happened at the same time? I remembered how you used to enjoy play-acting at crime. You had an abnormal predilection for criminal behavior. </p>
<p>“Since then I’ve often come to this boarding house, and unbeknownst to you, I searched Endō’s room. I figured out the only path the murderer could have taken was from the ceiling. I decided to spy on the boarders by going for what you call an attic walk. I frequently hunkered down for long periods of time, especially over your room. I clearly saw through the gaps how upset you were. </p>
<p>“The further I investigated, the further the circumstances pointed to you. Unfortunately I don’t have any evidence. That’s when I concocted that ruse of mine.” He let out another peal of laughter. “If you’ll excuse me, I’d best be on my way. I doubt I’ll see you again. After all, I know you’ve decided to turn yourself in.”</p>
<p>Saburō was too far gone to feel anything about this final trick of Akechi’s. His face betrayed no sign of recognition as Akechi took his leave. </p>
<p>“What does it feel like,” he wondered, “to be sentenced to death?”</p>
<p>Vague thoughts such as this were all that ran through his mind.</p>
<p>When he dropped the medicine bottle down the knothole, he thought he hadn’t been able to see where it fell, but he had actually seen the spilt poison seep into the rolling tobacco. He had pushed the memory of it deep into his subconscious, and this caused him to be psychologically revolted by cigarettes.</p>
<p>The Air Raid Shelter</p>
<p>Bōkūgō · 1956</p>
<p>I. The Story of Ichikawa Seiichi</p>
<p>Say, aren’t you tired? What’s the matter, you can’t fall asleep? Me neither. How about I tell you a story? I’m in the mood to recount a most unusual story.</p>
<p>Tonight we talked about peace. Of course it’s the proper path to take. No one disputes it, the matter is as good as settled. But you know, the one time in my life that I felt most alive was during the war. No, I don’t mean that in the way people usually say it. I’m not talking about the sense of purpose that came from mobilizing the nation for war. Mine was a more unhealthy and anti-social thrill.</p>
<p>Toward the end of the war the country was approaching total devastation. The aerial bombardments were fierce and Tokyo was reduced to a wasteland, but right there in the middle of hell on earth, I – now, what I’m about to say is just between you and me. If I had told anyone during the war, they would have killed me. Even today it’s likely to be frowned upon. </p>
<p>Human beings are complex creatures. From the moment we’re born, we are endowed with certain anti-social traits. It is taboo to act on these desires. Yet taboos are essential for human beings. Or rather, I should say it is the very need for taboos in the first place that proves human beings have an innate tendency to rebel against society. The so-called instinct for crime is another name for it.</p>
<p>There’s no question that fire is a great evil. But it’s also beautiful. They used to call the fires that burned through the city “the flowers of Edo.” 1 A majestic blaze evokes aesthetic feelings. The ecstasies of Nero watching Rome burn reflect the same psychology found to a greater or lesser extent in all of us. The practical value of flames licking at firewood as it heats the bath is qualitatively different from the feelings of beauty they inspire. If crackling firewood is impressive, then a house on fire must be more lovely still. A city block in flames is even more spectacular. And to witness a firestorm reduce an entire nation to dust and ashes – that would be the most breathtaking of all. Such is the transcendent beauty connected to death and destruction. I’m not exaggerating at all. Everyone holds feelings of this kind in their hearts.</p>
<p>As I said before, it was close to the end of the war. There were days when we could go to work at the company, and others when we could not. The air raids came daily. There were no vehicles left, so if an emergency summons came, we had no choice but to go on foot. The constant wailing of sirens had us leaping out of bed in the middle of the night. We would put on gaiters and air raid headgear, and dash for the air raid shelters. </p>
<p>Of course I cursed the war. But I can’t deny my fascination with what you might call the marvels of war. In the heat of the commotion, the wailing of sirens, booming of radios, and clanging of emergency bells throughout town exerted an extraordinary force over people. It had an amazing capacity to elevate one’s spirits.</p>
<p>What gave me the greatest thrill, however, was the marvel of new weapons. They were the weapons of the enemy, and I hated them, but there is no question that they were awe-inspiring. The gigantic B-29 was a prime example. We did not yet know about the atomic bomb. </p>
<p>As if in prelude to Tokyo burning, those silver giants would fly steadily in formation at dizzyingly high altitudes. When aircraft factories and the like were hit by bombs, we could feel the ground rumble as though an earthquake had struck, but we couldn’t see the bombs fall with our own eyes. All we saw were those gleaming silver wings far away in the sky. </p>
<p>As the B-29s left a trail of exhaust high above across the clear blue sky, it was like watching tiny killifish gliding through the waters of a crystal-clear lake. Even though the B-29s were the enemy, it was a splendid sight to see. To the naked eye, they looked almost cute until you took into account their altitude and realized how enormous they really were. Nowadays, if you fly on a commercial jetliner over the ocean, even a steamship looks as tiny as a killifish. But there was something precious about the idea of killifish transferred up into the sky.</p>
<p>One by one the B-29s would appear in formation from a distance. From wherever long-range artillery guns were stationed we would begin to hear a recurrent sound like peashooters being fired. The sight of the enemy and the sounds from our side seemed as harmless as the scenery in a performance of the noh play Atsumori.2</p>
<p>Tracing the path of the B-29s, black balls of smoke from the anti-aircraft guns became scattered pockmarks across the vast blue sky. Something glittering like stars was also in pursuit of the enemy aircraft. It looked as though diamond beads were being pelted at those silver giants. Almost invisible to the naked eye, these were, in fact, our fighter planes. They were intent on flying a collision course with the B-29s. The silver wings of our tiny fighter jets caught the light of the sun and reflected back the sparkle of diamonds.</p>
<p>I’m sure you also remember this. It was truly wondrous. In the moment when you forgot the reality of war and destruction, it was an exquisite prelude to a pageant in the sky. From the roof of the company, I sometimes watched these performances in the air with binoculars. Slowly the orderly silver formations would come into the round field of view of the binoculars. When they passed overhead, they suddenly loomed very large. I could even spy the white faces of the crew sitting inside like miniature dolls. The silver wings glowing in the rays of the sun were certainly beautiful. I could also make out our fighter planes on intercept courses, but they were as puny as tugboats beside a steamer.</p>
<p>That night I trudged my way home from work. The trains only ran at intervals, and the rest of the time you had to walk. It was about 8:00 p.m. Stars glinted in the night sky. The city streets were pitch dark due to the blackout. All of us carried flashlights in our pockets just in case. They were never bright enough, and if you used one for too long the batteries would go dead. Consequently, small, hand-powered electric lights were a popular item. I’m sure you remember them. They were metal devices small enough to fit in one hand. You turned a lever to get one going, and then with a humming sound the generator kicked in and powered the lamp. When it was too dark to see the ground under your feet, you pulled it out and set it humming. It only offered a dim light, but since it didn’t need batteries, it was really quite useful.</p>
<p>Shadowy figures walked in silence down the pitch-dark avenue. Everyone was in a hurry, eager to get home before the air raid sirens went off again. Maybe just for once we will get home today without the sirens going off – this was the only thought on everyone’s mind.</p>
<p>At the time I was walking past Denzuin Temple. A frightening sound pierced the silence. Near and far, an ominous chorus of sirens began to whine in anguish. No matter how often you heard that sound, it still came as a shock every time. Indistinct figures ran in all directions. I was a poor runner and I hastened my stride, but before I could move, the black outline of a man from the civil defense corps ran by screaming, “Run for cover! Run for cover!”</p>
<p>I could hear radios turned on everywhere I turned. It was common practice to turn up the volume as loud as possible even on household radios. The same message was repeated over and over again. The B-29 bombers were flying over the Izu Peninsula headed for Tokyo. They would here in the blink of an eye.</p>
<p>I tried to hurry home in the direction of Ōtsuka station, but before I got there I could hear the far-off booming of artillery canons. Gradually the sound of artillery fire grew closer. The city was pitch black. Cautionary alarms gave way to emergency alarms. It was not yet 9:00 p.m., but silence swept through the streets as though it were the middle of the night. There wasn’t a soul around except me.</p>
<p>Periodically I stopped to glance up at the sky. Of course I was terrified. But in another spirit, I exalted in the beauty of it.</p>
<p>With a hiss, the artillery fire traced lines of light far up in the sky. Then with a patter they gloriously burst apart like fireworks. The enemy formations must have been near where the shots fell. It was thirty degrees from where I was standing. They were still a good distance away. </p>
<p>Several extremely bright balls of lights hung suspended in midair, lighting the sky with the glare of arc lamps. They were the enemies’ flare bombs. They looked just like the annual fireworks over Ryōgoku. The black night sky glowed with the iridescence of jellyfish. </p>
<p>The sounds and lights from the artillery guns grew steadily fiercer. They no longer occupied just one part of the sky. The sky on the opposite side was also rent with explosions. The enemy formation had split into two groups, and was attacking Tokyo on two fronts. One after another the planes switched positions, dropping explosives and incendiary bombs around Tokyo. That was the enemy’s strategy in those days. First, they created a wall of fire to encircle us. Then, when escape was impossible, they finished it off by carpet-bombing the central area. It was as effective as catching rats in a bag. </p>
<p>After a long pause, the sky flickered with light in the distance. By this time I had reached the neighborhood civil defense station. Several people wearing protective helmets were waiting with firefighting equipment. They were crouched down behind sandbags, surveying the skies. I was allowed to hunker down with them.</p>
<p>“It’s Yokohama – that bright spot on the horizon is Yokohama burning. The radio just announced it.” </p>
<p>A civil defense corpsman ran over and reported this to us.</p>
<p>“Hmm, the sky over there is lit up, too. I wonder where we’ve been hit. Somewhere around Shibuya, I reckon.”</p>
<p>No sooner had he spoken than the sky, already flickering with light, grew bright with flashes of light from the left and right. </p>
<p>“That must be Senjū.”</p>
<p>“There goes Itabashi.”</p>
<p>As people called out with place names, we could see sparks dancing in the sky, and even, for the first time, actual flames. On all sides, Tokyo was as bright as Ginza under the noonday sun.</p>
<p>Artillery fire was now bursting directly overhead. I could faintly make out the wings of the enemy planes glinting with the reflection of the flames below. More than usual, I was struck by the sheer size of the B-29. It was flying at low altitude.</p>
<p>Countless flare bombs like iridescent jellyfish floated across the sky. They came and went in a flash, but while they fell their appearance was truly lovely. On the ground, fiery red ash swirled up to meet the shimmering jellyfish. It looked like a bluish-white beaded kimono pattern hemmed with a red brocade, and interlaced with the silver and gold threads of artillery fire.</p>
<p>“Oh, it’s our boys. Our fighter planes hit one of ’em.”</p>
<p>Suddenly a fire erupted in the sky. Covered in flames, the giant enemy aircraft plummeted to the ground. In the vicinity where the plane appeared to have crashed, the flames of an explosion rose into the air.</p>
<p>“Hurrah, they’ve done it! That’s the third plane they’ve shot down.”</p>
<p>The members of the civil defense raised a cheer. Some even cried out “Banzai!”	</p>
<p>“Hey, you. It’s too dangerous to stay here. You’d better head for an air raid shelter.”</p>
<p>A corpsman gave me a hard shove on my shoulder with his hand. I had no choice but to stagger to my feet and start walking again.</p>
<p>The festive lights in the sky and the accompanying tumult were reaching a feverish pitch. On the ground, too, the situation was getting out of hand. The fingers of fire were slowly encroaching, so the people who could no longer bear to remain cooped up in the air raid shelters were getting orders from civil defense corpsmen for a mass evacuation to an open space somewhere. The road was becoming crowded with pushcarts and other makeshift two-wheel carts laden with personal belongings. </p>
<p>I rushed to join the milling throng. My wife was home alone. No doubt she’d fled by now. I was worried about her, but there was nothing I could do.</p>
<p>The sound of explosions reverberated in all directions. Mixed with the howling of ground fires and shouting voices, it amounted to a near-deafening roar. Above the din I could make out a strange sound like an evening shower beating against the rooftops. I broke into a mad run. I knew the instant I heard it that it was the sound of incendiary bombs coming down. For all I knew they could be falling right over my head.</p>
<p>Hearing cries behind me, I swung around and saw the entire avenue engulfed in a sea of flames. The incendiary bombs were small, eight-sided cylinders that were dropped in bundles, and scattered when they hit the ground. I was in grave danger, but I managed to escape without being hit. A middle-aged woman had fallen down in the middle of the fire and was writhing in agony. A brave civil defenseman entered the sea of flames and made his way to try and save her.</p>
<p>I convinced myself that bombs would not fall in exactly the same place twice, so feeling momentarily safe, I gazed at the raging blaze. Despite the fact that the entire avenue was consumed by a fiery hurricane, I couldn’t help but think it was still beautiful. It was an unbelievably exquisite sight. </p>
<p>Those incendiary bombs contained something akin to rags dipped in oil. As the bombs fell, the rags came out and fluttered through the air, clinging to the tubes like feathers. The tubes themselves plummeted from the sky straight as an arrow, and when they crashed into the ground, the oil remaining inside splattered, covering the surrounding area with flames. This meant they did not have very concentrated strength. If they hit a wooden building, it would catch on fire, but in the case of an asphalt road, the flames would slowly die down until they went out entirely. I watched this without moving until the flames were as small as the light of a firefly. The innumerable flickering of fireflies across the wide stretch of ground eventually dissipated, but their passage itself was as beautiful to watch as a show of fireworks.</p>
<p>Countless little tongues of flame leapt out of the eight-sided shells and lazily tumbled out of the sky. I seem to recall that the background scenery for the traveling scene in the noh play Jisshukō 3 is composed entirely of candles lit up like St. Elmo’s fire, but with the black velvet of the heavens for a background, this felt hundreds of times more intense. No ordinary fireworks could approach such beauty. I stood in awe. I forgot that there was a deadly conflagration brewing around me and fixed my eyes on the sky, my mouth agape.</p>
<p>Soon enough the fingers of flame were encroaching upon me. Bombs that exploded on contact spread the fire further. The streets glowed like sunset, and the faces of the people fleeing in all directions were illuminated a fiery red. </p>
<p>Here and there were spots that seemed like a veritable inferno. All of Tokyo was shrouded by fire. Black clouds of smoke gathered from the burning earth to form a reddish fringe and billowed into the sky with fearsome speed. A gale-force wind raised a high-pitched sound as it whipped past. Swirling red and black smoke coalesced into a cyclone in the middle of the sky, tearing off roof tiles and making strips of tin sheeting fly through the air like bits of aluminum foil.</p>
<p>The formation of B-29s swept overhead before splitting up to crisscross the sky. Our artillery guns had by now fallen silent, so the enemy planes could descend to extremely low altitudes, terrifying the civilians below as they selected their targets and unleashed incendiary bombs and smaller ordnance.</p>
<p>I was frozen to the spot watching the ominous approach of one of those giant B-29s. The silver fuselage captured the sheen of fire from the ground and cast it back like a ruddy glow on the face of a drunken giant.</p>
<p>For some reason, the appearance of the menacing enemy aircraft overhead brought to mind a tengu mask.4 A crimson tengu mask, large enough to blot out the sky, glared at me with golden eyeballs and plunged into a precipitous dive. As though in a nightmare, that dusky red face swooped in closer and closer.</p>
<p>The crimson visage of the giant plane danced wildly almost right over the ground as it broke through the black smoke kicked up by the raging winds and the cyclone. It was as terrifying as Armageddon, but it also possessed an indescribable beauty. It was magnificent. Sublime.</p>
<p>I could no longer stand in the street. Tiles, sheets of tin roofing and flames blew to and fro as logs, planks and other fragments of debris tumbled from the dusky red sky. Just when I thought I could catch my breath, a sheet of tin roofing smashed into my shoulder and sliced open a large gash on my jaw. Blood came gushing out. Still the whistling sound of falling incendiary bombs continued. The blow had knocked off my glasses, but the thought to stop and search for them never even crossed my mind.</p>
<p>There was nothing to do but to take refuge somewhere. To cut my way through the raging winds I ran crossways. I had arrived at the intersection of the Tsuji district in Ōtsuka, and ran down a side street with a temple, heading further and further north. The houses lining both sides of the street had already begun to burn. A grand estate was at the end of the road. The front gate had been left open, and I scurried through it. </p>
<p>The garden inside was almost as big as a public park. The trees were enormous. As the trees shook from the whirlwind and fiery ash rained down, I scrambled past and made my way inside. I later learned that the house belonged to a prominent industrialist named Sugimoto. </p>
<p>The estate stood on the edge of a steep cliff. It was a cul-de-sac from the direction of Tsuji, while stretching before one’s eyes all the way into the distance was the avenue from Sugamo to Hikawa-chō. Such heights are sporadically found throughout Tokyo like fault lines, and this one was no exception. Yet it was my first time in this part of town, and I was so caught off guard that for a moment I wondered if it hadn’t been caused by the air raid. </p>
<p>The cliff was located at the furthest end of the estate, but not too far away was the entrance to a large air raid shelter built of concrete. Later I was to discover that the residents had all evacuated, leaving the manor completely deserted. For the time being, however, I assumed the family was hiding in the air raid shelter. Although I was certain to be refused if I encountered them, I proceeded inside anyway.</p>
<p>It was a sturdy air raid shelter with floors, walls and ceilings of solid concrete. I set my trusty hand-powered light going and hesitantly crept forward. From the entrance the passageway split in two, but even the main room was as desolate as an ancient ruin. </p>
<p>The main room was a rectangular space of about ten square yards with wooden benches resting against the walls on two sides. I took a seat, but immediately stood back up. Try as I might, I couldn’t calm down. The rumblings from the sky and ground were audible even from inside the shelter. The booming of explosions in fact resonated more powerfully than when I was above ground, as the shelter itself trembled from the vibrations.</p>
<p>From time to time, a bright red flash like lightning would carry deep into the shelter. When the light penetrated all the way into the interior, I noticed for the first time another person crouched down in a corner on one of the benches across from me. It was a woman. </p>
<p>Sparking up my flashlight to cast a weak light, I called out to her. She stood right up and made her way over to me.</p>
<p>She was dressed in old navy blue work trousers and an air raid hood of the same color. The face under the hood illuminated by my flashlight astonished me. She was very beautiful. If you asked me how beautiful she was, I wouldn’t know where to begin. She had a beauty I’d always dreamt of, and there were no words to describe it.</p>
<p>“Do you live here?” I asked. </p>
<p>“No, I just came running for shelter,” she replied.</p>
<p>“The garden is large, so the fire won’t spread. It might be a good idea to stay here until morning,” I said, and we both sat down.</p>
<p>I don’t remember what we talked about after that. Mostly we sat side by side in silence. We never asked each other’s names or mentioned where we lived.</p>
<p>A roaring sound that was neither the sound of the storm or the fire reached our ears. There was also the booming sound of explosions and tremors in the ground. The red lightning repeatedly struck, and a burning smell was swept by the wind.</p>
<p>I left the air raid shelter once to look outside. The manor was enveloped in flames, and the fire was moving from tree to tree with a crackling noise. It was as bright as day, and so hot I could feel the heat against my cheek. Looking up, I saw the sky was blanketed with the reddish-black color of blood. Fierce winds howled wildly. There was no sign of dead bodies in the garden. I ran as far as the gate, but I didn’t come across anyone at the front of the avenue, either. There were only swirling clouds of fire and smoke. I had no choice but to run back to the shelter.</p>
<p>When I returned, the woman had reverted to the same motionless posture in the darkness as before. </p>
<p>“Oh, I’m parched. It’s too bad there’s no water.”</p>
<p> “I have some here,” the woman replied. As though she had been waiting for me to ask, she slid a canteen off her shoulder and fumbled through the darkness to hand it to me. The woman had prudently filled her canteen before she fled. I drank several cups’ worth. When I handed it back, she seemed to take a drink as well. </p>
<p>“It must be hopeless by now,” she murmured despondently.</p>
<p>“It’s okay. As long as we stay here, we’ll be safe.” </p>
<p>At that moment I felt a powerful surge of desire. I suppose you will say there is no place for indulging in passion when the world is caught in the grips of anxiety and confusion, but the truth is quite the opposite. A boy I know once told me he was overwhelmed by powerful urges every time there was an air raid. He confessed that at such times he would lose himself in masturbation.	</p>
<p>But in my case, it was no trifling whim. It was love at first sight. The woman’s beauty was peerless. Otherworldly. It was the sort of unique, once in a lifetime opportunity to meet the Mona Lisa of my dreams. That mystical encounter drove me mad. I groped through the dark and clasped the woman’s hand. She did not refuse me. On the contrary, she gladly returned my embrace. </p>
<p>The whole city of Tokyo was a great pyre, with black clouds of smoke and fiery ash strewn across the sky like a golden lacquer screen. Violent winds blew everywhere, sweeping all manner of debris from the ground up into cyclones. Meanwhile giant red fighter planes careened wildly, and showers of incendiary and explosive bombs raining down on us. Heaven and earth reverberated with thunderous cries, and there was no way of knowing what was to come in the next instant. Can you understand this sort of passion when your very existence could end at any moment? In my whole life, I never experienced that kind of joy, that vitality, that raison d’être. Never in my past, and impossible in my future – it was a singular occurrence.</p>
<p>Heaven and earth were in chaos. The country was on the edge of collapse. The two of us were also out of our minds. We tore away all that constrained our bodies, and as the only two people left in the world we clasped to one another and moaned, went mad, wailed and cried. We were intoxicated by a sublime Eros. </p>
<p>Had I fallen asleep? No, that couldn’t be it. I hadn’t slept. But before I knew it, night had turned to day. A wan light suffused with yellow smoke percolated through the shelter. The woman was nowhere to be found. Her belongings were also gone. No trace of her remained.</p>
<p>But it wasn’t a dream. It couldn’t have just been a dream.</p>
<p>I stumbled out of the shelter. The houses were destroyed by fire, and where they stood was now a blanket of embers, smoke and fire. The ground was so badly scorched it was like walking on a hot plate. I dodged my way around flames and smoke, picking a path through the clear patches. I continued in this fashion a long way until I reached my house. To my good fortune, the fire had spared it, and my wife was unharmed. </p>
<p>The streets remained full of beggar-like men and women who had lost everything and were wandering dementedly with nowhere to go.</p>
<p>At my house as well, there were three other couples, acquaintances of ours, who had been bombed out of their homes. For many days to come we had to make desperate efforts to buy food at the market. </p>
<p>In spite of the hardships, I could not forget that night of passion. Almost every day I roamed the vicinity of the razed Sugimoto estate in Tsuji, asking questions to the former residents of the area as they searched for their valuables. I went around persistently inquiring if anyone had seen the young woman who took cover in the Sugimoto family’s concrete air raid shelter on the night of the bombardment.</p>
<p>I will skip over the finer details, but with great effort I pursued a trail of gossip from one person to the next until at last I found an old woman. She was a fifty-something year old woman without family named Miyazono Tomi staying with friends in the Sensō district of Ikebukuro.</p>
<p>When I visited her, I inundated her with questions. She had worked in the house of a company employee near the Sugimoto estate. She told me that the rest of the household fled goodness-knows-where on the night of the bombardment, leaving her behind. Then she remembered Mr. Sugimoto’s air raid shelter, and fled there by herself.</p>
<p>Although Tomi had stayed there until morning, she curiously did not remember the young woman or me. I carefully questioned her to make certain she did not have the wrong shelter, but there was no other Sugimoto family in the area, and her description of the location and construction of the concrete shelter perfectly matched the one where we stayed. There were entrances on both sides of that shelter. Both led in a roundabout way to the main room. Tomi seemed not to have gone all the way into the main room, and took a different entrance from the one I did. She must have taken cover in the bend adjacent to the main room. Beyond that her responses to my queries were vague. That night was a shock to the nerves and it’s no surprise her memory wasn’t clear. </p>
<p>As a result, I walked away with no more information about the young woman than when I started. It’s been ten years since that night. I kept looking for that woman as best I could, but not a single clue turned up. The mystery surrounding her only made me revere that one night we shared even more dearly. My life was tied to the Eros of that night.</p>
<p>I was convinced there was no other woman whose face and body were as beautiful as hers. I formed a boundary around that night, and lost interest in all other women. That frenzied night of violent passions consumed my desires. </p>
<p>It makes my body tremble to think of it. In the darkness of that cave surrounded by an inferno in the sky and on the ground, a beautiful face and body emerged to comfort me – a feverish embrace, a thousand nights of passion distilled into one. There’s a strange phrase I always keep close to my heart: “A dream of the five-hued aurora: a beauty to make you shiver.” That says it for me. Like the curtains of light that flutter through the northern skies, the flames of the air raid and the banquet of death captured the awe and beauty of the five-hued aurora. For a night of passion under those conditions, nothing short of the multicolored aurora could compare.</p>
<p>II. Miyazono Tomi’s Story</p>
<p>“It’s been ages since I’ve been this tipsy. You seem like a hearty drinker, too.</p>
<p>“Hearing your titillating story brings back memories for me, too. But why would a gentleman such as yourself really want to hear the erotic stories of a wrinkled old lady? My, you are an unusual fellow, ha-ha-ha.</p>
<p>“As I said before, I am just a poor old woman, quite alone in the world. My friends and family perished. After the war I somehow found my way to these hot springs up in the mountains. The owner of this establishment has treated me very kindly, and I get on well with the other maids, so I’ve decided this is as good a place as any to live out my days. But I’ll have you know I was in Tokyo through the war. I experienced those horrible air raids. Well, sir, it was during one of those air raids that truly remarkable thing happened. </p>
<p>“How many years has it been? It was after the air raids which devastated Ueno and Asakusa, and left the Sumida river littered with bodies. It was the air raid that razed the city from Shinjuku, Ikebukuro and Sugamo all the way down to Koishikawa. </p>
<p>“At the time, I worked as a maid in the home of Mr. Miyoshi, who was a company employee. His house burned to the ground, and I became separated from the rest of the household. I fled on my own to the air raid shelter in a grand estate nearby.</p>
<p>“The estate was in the Tsuji district of Ōtsuka, not far from the garage at the end of the streetcar line. That estate was three or four blocks away from Tsuji at the top of a tall cliff. The people in the estate had all been evacuated, and the house was deserted.</p>
<p>“It was a splendid air raid shelter made of concrete. I shook and trembled all alone in the dark.</p>
<p>“Then a man entered the shelter shining a flashlight as he approached. Since he was holding the flashlight I couldn’t see his face, but as best I could tell he appeared to be a younger man in his thirties or so. </p>
<p>“For a while he did not notice me, and just sat rigidly on the wooden bench before he became aware of my presence in the corner. Shining the flashlight, he motioned for me to come closer.</p>
<p>“Naturally I was afraid to be alone, so I gladly sat down beside him. I had with me a canteen of water, so I gave it to him to drink. You won’t believe this, but we had scarcely exchanged more than one or two words when he brusquely clasped my hands in his!</p>
<p>“There must have been some mistake. He seemed to think I was a young woman. The light was very weak, so he must not have been able to see my face very clearly. Also there was fire raging outside. A fearsome wind was howling. His nerves must also have been frayed. He started doing very erotic things. Ha-ha... oh dear, you’ve been such a good listener that I’ve gone and told you this little story of mine. But this is the first time I have ever told anyone. It was all so very embarrassing that I’ve never been able to tell a soul.</p>
<p>“Eh, what happened next, you ask? I too lost all inhibition in the air raid shelter. I had every intention of becoming a young woman again, ha-ha-ha. We did many things. Now that I think of it, it’s a very foolish story. I did whatever he asked, stripping off my clothing and the rest.</p>
<p>“This is awful. I may be a bit tipsy, but really, I mustn’t go any further, ha-ha-ha... Well, after doing this and that, the man finally collapsed. He seemed to have fallen fast asleep. I became embarrassed and hurriedly put my clothes back on, running away from the air raid shelter before dawn. We never got a good look at each other’s faces, nor did we ever learn each other’s names.</p>
<p>“Eh, can that really be all, you ask? Actually, there was a reunion of sorts. In the air raid shelter I never saw my lover’s face and could only guess he was a young man. But several weeks later, as I was working as a maid in the kitchen of an acquaintance of mine in Ikebukuro, goodness knows how, but who should come looking for me, but that man!</p>
<p>“At first I didn’t know it was him. It became apparent as we talked. There was a young woman in the air raid shelter. Since I was in the air raid shelter that same night, he took the trouble to find me to inquire about her. Had I seen the young woman? Was she possibly someone I knew? He was desperate for information.</p>
<p>“His name was Ichikawa Seiichi. His clothes looked like everyone else’s in those days – khaki, like a soldier’s uniform. But you could see he was a fine man like a company employee. He was just past thirty and wore glasses, looking like the handsome men in my youth. Ha-ha-ha...</p>
<p>“No sooner had I heard his story than I guessed what happened. Mr. Ichikawa was laboring under a terrible misunderstanding. He had no idea that his lover that night was an old woman like me. He was convinced she was a beautiful young woman. It was touching. He had pined after that woman and went to great lengths to locate her.</p>
<p>“Whether it was a bad joke or an act of sheer folly, I didn’t know what to do. How could I tell him that the lover he thought was a young woman was actually me? Awkwardly, I lied. He didn’t question a single word. He hardly even noticed how upset I was.</p>
<p>“Tears welled up in the eyes of that handsome Mr. Ichikawa. It made me feel strange to see the longing he had for that beautiful young woman. It was a foolish, pitiful emotion I can’t explain.</p>
<p>“Wasn’t it an unbelievable stroke of fortune to be united for a night with that handsome young man, you ask? At my age, it made for a most unusual situation, exciting yet shameful. What a great shock it was to learn at last that my lover was a handsome fellow. Of course, not having seen his face before, I was twice as grateful, hee-hee!”</p>
<p>Doctor Mera’s Mysterious Crimes</p>
<p>Mera hakase no fushigina hanzai · 1932</p>
<p>In order to develop ideas for detective novels I often travel to different places, but when I am in Tokyo, I always return to the same spots – Asakusa Park and the Flower Palace, the Ueno Museum and Zoo, the steam ferry over the Sumida River, and the Ryōgoku Kokugikan (I’m drawn to its round roof, which reminds me of the former Panorama Building).1 In fact I just returned home from attending a “Ghost Convention” at the Kokugikan. For old times’ sake I meandered through the labyrinth of the convention, indulging in fond memories of childhood. </p>
<p>In any event, some time ago the pressure to produce a manuscript became so intense that I couldn’t bear to remain cooped up in the house any longer. For about a week I aimlessly roamed the streets of Tokyo. Then, one day I unexpectedly met a strange character at the Ueno Zoo. That is where this story begins. </p>
<p>It was already evening and the zoo was near closing time. Most of the sightseers had already left, and a deep tranquility settled over the grounds.</p>
<p>The same thing always happens in the theaters and yose 2 halls. Their entrances inevitably become crowded with people taking their leave well before the final curtain draws to a close. I’ve never cared much for this tendency on the part of the Edokko.3 </p>
<p>It was no different that day at the zoo. For some reason, Tokyo people are always in a hurry to get home. It’s not like they are going to be locked in, but a place empties out until there isn’t a single person left.</p>
<p>I was standing absent-mindedly in front of the monkey cages, enjoying the abnormal quiet that had replaced the customary bustle.</p>
<p>The monkeys also looked forlorn without anyone to play with them.</p>
<p>It was very peaceful for a while and then suddenly I felt the presence of another person behind me.</p>
<p>A young man with long hair and a pale complexion was standing there. He wore shapeless clothes and bore the appearance of a so-called “lumpen,” 4 but his expression was lively. He began to tease the monkeys in the cage.</p>
<p>He seemed to be a frequent visitor to the zoo, as he was quite adept at sporting with the monkeys. He made them do all kinds of tricks for a treat. When he tired of his games, he would finally toss them the treat. His antics were extremely amusing, and I watched with a grin on my face. </p>
<p>“What puzzles me about monkeys is, why do they imitate what they see people do?” The young man asked me out of the blue. At that moment he was tossing a tangerine peel up into the air and catching it. A monkey in the cage was doing exactly the same thing, throwing the peel of a tangerine and then catching it.</p>
<p>I laughed and he spoke again.</p>
<p>“When you think about it, mimicry is a scary business. That God gave monkeys that instinct, I mean.”</p>
<p>I decided this fellow must be a lumpen philosopher. </p>
<p>“It’s strange to see a monkey imitate, but there’s nothing unusual about human imitation. God gave human beings lots of the same instincts as monkeys. That’s scary when you think about it. Do you know the story about the traveler who met a big monkey in the mountains?”</p>
<p>The man seemed to like telling stories, and gradually became more talkative. I am shy and don’t particularly like being spoken to by strangers, but I was curious about this fellow. I guess I was attracted by his pale complexion and tousled hair. Or maybe it was his philosophic way of talking which struck a chord with me.</p>
<p>“I never heard that one before. Did the big monkey do something?”</p>
<p>I indicated for him to continue his story.</p>
<p>“It was deep in the mountains far away from any human settlement, and a man traveling alone happened upon a big monkey. Before he could react, the monkey stole his sword: pulled the sword out of its scabbard and waved it around just for the hell of it. The traveler was a townsman, not a samurai, so when his blade was taken away he had no other. His life was in danger.”</p>
<p>I greatly enjoyed the unique scene of standing before the monkey cage at sunset, listening to the pale man’s weird tale. “Yes, I see,” I nodded in appreciation.</p>
<p>“He tried to get his sword back, but the monkey was skillful at climbing trees, and put itself beyond his reach. However, the traveler had his wits about him, and devised an ingenious plan. He picked up a branch that had fallen from a tree nearby and, fashioning it in the likeness of a sword, tried out different moves. To the monkey’s misfortune, God gave monkeys the instinct to imitate human beings and it began to mimic every gesture the traveler made. Before the monkey knew it, it had committed suicide. You see, the traveler waited until he’d caught the monkey’s interest, and then made a display of hacking at his neck with the tree branch. The monkey copied this by stabbing itself in the throat with the drawn blade. It couldn’t stop. Blood spilled out, but as though it couldn’t believe that was its own blood, it kept slicing its throat until it expired. In the end the man not only got his sword back, he also won himself a big monkey for a souvenir. That’s the story!”</p>
<p>The man laughed as he finished his tale, but it was a strangely unsettling laugh.	</p>
<p>“You don’t say.”</p>
<p>I laughed back, the man abruptly became serious.</p>
<p>“No, it’s true. The thing about monkeys is they have this sad and fearsome destiny. You want me to prove it?”</p>
<p>He threw a branch that had fallen nearby to one of the monkeys. He faked cutting his own throat with the walking-stick he had at his side.</p>
<p>It was unbelievable what happened next. The young man was such a genius at manipulation that the monkey actually picked up the branch and started jabbing at its own neck.</p>
<p>“What did I tell you, if that branch was a real sword, that little monkey would be on his way to heaven by now.”</p>
<p>The expansive grounds of the park were utterly deserted. The darkness of night had already cast deep shadowy circles under the leafy trees. I shivered despite myself. I imagined that the pale-faced youth standing before me was no ordinary man, but a sorcerer. </p>
<p>“Now do you understand the frightfulness of mimicry? It is the same with human beings. Man can’t avoid imitation, either. We, too, are born with a sad and fearsome destiny. Didn’t the sociologist Tarde pretty much sum up human life with the word ‘imitation?’ ” 5</p>
<p>I can no longer remember everything he said, but the young man proceeded to explain the horrors of “imitation.” Then he told me about his abnormal fear of mirrors. </p>
<p>“Isn’t it a bit scary when you stare too long into a mirror? I can’t think of anything worse. Why? Because there is another version of yourself in the mirror, which imitates you just like a monkey.”</p>
<p>I recall him saying something to this effect.</p>
<p>It came time for the zoo to close its gates, and a zookeeper escorted us out. We walked out, but we didn’t say our goodbyes just yet. In the inky darkness under the trees in the park we walked side by side and continued our conversation. </p>
<p>“I know who you are. You’re Mr. Edogawa, aren’t you? The one who writes detective novels?”</p>
<p>We were walking under the dark trees when he unexpectedly confronted me like this. I was caught off guard again. He was a strange, disturbing individual. Yet, at the same time it increased my interest in him.</p>
<p>“I love your work. To be honest, though, I haven’t enjoyed your more recent efforts. Maybe it was because your earlier works were harder to come by, but I really cherished reading them.”</p>
<p>He was very outspoken. This, too, impressed me.</p>
<p>“Oh look, the moon’s come out.”</p>
<p>The young man jumped from one subject to the next in the blink of an eye. It made me half wonder if he wasn’t a bit mad.</p>
<p>“Today is the fourteenth, isn’t it? It’s nearly a full moon tonight. Now that’s what I call brilliant moonlight. The light of the moon is really mysterious. I read somewhere the light of the moon has the power to bewitch, and it’s true. The same thing appears totally different by night than it does by day, right? Even your face has changed. You almost look like a different person now than you did just a moment ago standing in front of the monkey cage.”</p>
<p>Seeing him stare intently at my face as he said it really did make me feel queer. With both his eyes lined with dark rings and his lips hidden in shadow, the young man’s face took on a frightful appearance of its own.</p>
<p>“The moon is a kind of mirror. The ‘moon-in-the-water,’ 6 and the saying ‘the moon is bright as a mirror’ are proof that there is something to it. Go ahead and see for yourself.”</p>
<p>His gaze pointed toward the smoky silver surface of the Shinobazu Pond, which looked twice as big as it did in the daytime. </p>
<p>“If what you see by day is real, then don’t you think what is illuminated at night by the light of the moon must be an image of that daytime reality, reflected by the mirror of the moon?”</p>
<p>With his shapeless figure and ghost-white face, the young man looked like a reflection in a mirror himself.</p>
<p>“I bet you’re gathering material for a novel. I have a story that would be perfect for you. It’s a true story based on my own experiences. Maybe you’d be interested in hearing it. Do you want me to tell it to you?”</p>
<p>I was, in fact, gathering material for a novel. But aside from that, I was eager to hear this strange fellow’s story. From what I had already heard, I couldn’t imagine it would be just another run-of-the-mill yarn. “By all means, let’s hear it. Would you care to join me for a bite to eat somewhere? Let’s find a quiet place where we can talk undisturbed.”</p>
<p>He shook his head and replied, “I don’t want to refuse your kind offer. I never stand on ceremony. It’s just that my story isn’t suited to bright electric lights. If you don’t mind, I’d prefer to recount it right here. We can bask in the bewitching moonlight on this sitting stone and gaze out at Shinobazu Pond, reflected by that giant mirror above us. Besides, my story isn’t long in the telling.”</p>
<p>I was happy to oblige his request. I sat down beside him on a flat rock under the trees. There, perched on a hill overlooking the pond, I listened to his extraordinary tale.</p>
<p>— 2 —</p>
<p>“As you know, there’s a novel by Doyle called The Valley of Fear.”</p>
<p>The young man wasted no time launching into his story.</p>
<p>“It was a canyon carved out between two steep mountains somewhere. But the valley of fear doesn’t have to be just a natural gorge. Right here in the middle of Tokyo, even in Marunouchi, you can find a valley of fear.</p>
<p>“A narrow street hemmed in between two towering buildings is far steeper and more perilous than any ordinary canyon. A haunted valley made by civilization, a canyon built by science. From the street at the bottom of the canyon, the six or seven story concrete buildings on both sides swallow up any hope of a view. Like natural cliffs, they have no greenery, no seasonal flowers, no protrusions to catch the eye; just two giant slabs of gray cleaved in half by an ax. The sky above is narrow as a belt. For only a few precious minutes a day they receive a decent bit of light from the sun and moon. From the bottom the noonday sun is no closer than a distant star. A weird, chilly wind is constantly whipping about.</p>
<p>“Before the great earthquake, I lived in one of those canyons. The front entrance of the building faced S—— Avenue in the Marunouchi. It was bright and lively. But when you went around back, you came right up against another building. The buildings presented one another with a bleak expanse of concrete: cliffs with windows facing one another across an alley scarcely two meters across. When I talk about a haunted valley in the city, this is exactly what I have in mind.</p>
<p>“The buildings had a few rooms which served as apartments, but for the most part they were only used in the daytime, as offices, and people would go home after dark. Bustling by day, at night they were the picture of solitude. In the heart of the Marunouchi, it was as alarming as the hoot of an owl. It felt like I was lost deep in the mountains. After nightfall, the alley behind the building truly became a canyon. </p>
<p>“During the day I worked at the front desk, and at night I slept in a room in the basement. There were four or five of us who lived there, but I liked art, so whenever I had a free moment I would paint my canvases in seclusion. Naturally there were many days when I didn’t even speak to my companions. </p>
<p>“The incident I am going to tell you about occurred in the canyon around back, so I had better explain a few things. It was truly incredible how the buildings matched. What I mean is that they mirrored each other perfectly. I often wonder if the architect who designed them wasn’t playing at some kind of mischief.</p>
<p>“Both buildings were of roughly the same height, five stories apiece. While the color and ornamentation on the front and sides were quite different, the sides facing one another in the canyon were exactly alike. From the shape of the roof to their gray color and the arrangement of four windows per floor, they were as identical as photographs. It’s possible that even the cracks and flaws in the concrete were the same.</p>
<p>“The rooms looking out onto the canyon scarcely received more than a few minutes of sunlight a day – well, yes, that’s a bit of an exaggeration; but it didn’t amount to much at all. Needless to say, no one wanted to use those rooms, especially the most inconvenient ones on the fifth floor, which always remained empty. In my free time I would frequently sneak up there with my canvases and brushes. Sure enough, whenever I looked out the window, the building across the way looked just like a photograph of the one I was in. They so resembled one another that it gave you the creeps. There was a tangible sense of foreboding that a terrible incident was waiting to happen.</p>
<p>“Well, it wasn’t long before my premonitions proved right on the mark. There was a suicide by hanging from the northernmost window on the fifth floor. And then, before we knew it, there were two more deaths.</p>
<p>“The first victim was a middle-aged spice broker. From the moment he walked in to rent the office, he came across as an impressive character. He may have been a tradesman, but he sure didn’t look like one. He was dark and brooding, the type that is always thinking of something. When I heard about his suicide, I wondered if he had rented one of the sunless rooms in back that faced the canyon . Just as I suspected, the one he chose, the northernmost apartment on the fifth floor, was the furthest from human contact (it might sound strange to use an expression like this in a building, but the apartment had that kind of feeling about it). It was also the darkest one, and so naturally the rent was the cheapest for those two adjoining rooms. </p>
<p>“I believe he was only there for about a week after he moved in. It wasn’t long at all.</p>
<p>“The spice broker was a bachelor, so he brought in a shoddy-looking bed and used the inner room as a bedroom. At night he would sleep alone there – a desolate cave in the steep cliffs overlooking a ghost valley. Then, on a night of bright moonlight, he flung a rope out the window onto the small crossbar of a telephone pole, and committed suicide by hanging himself.</p>
<p>“In the morning a laborer assigned to sweep the streets in the vicinity discovered the hanged man swinging from the cliffs high overhead, and caused a great stir.</p>
<p>“In the end we never learned why the man committed suicide. His business wasn’t doing particularly badly, and he didn’t have any worries about debt. On top of that he was a bachelor, so it couldn’t have been prompted by a domestic problem. Nor was there any indication that he’d done it in a fit of passion, say, committing suicide because of a broken heart.</p>
<p>“‘He was possessed by the devil. From the moment he arrived, he was strangely withdrawn. I knew there was something wrong with him.’ That’s the sort of conclusion people drew. When it happened the first time, they could dismiss it like that. But soon another renter came along who took the same room. He never slept there, but one day he said he needed to stay overnight to get some work done. We figured he must have shut himself up in that room for the night, because the next morning there was bedlam when another swinging body was discovered. He died the exact same way, suicide by hanging.</p>
<p>“Of course no one had the slightest idea about the cause. Unlike the spice broker, the second man had an exceedingly sunny disposition, and even his choice of that gloomy room was simply due to the fact that the rent was low.</p>
<p>“The window that opened onto the valley of fear was cursed. A rumor like a ghost story spread in whispers that whoever entered that room would start to crave a solitary death for no reason at all. </p>
<p>“The third victim was no ordinary renter. One of the office workers in the building was a brave fellow who announced he was going to give it a try. He was as adventurous as someone who explores a haunted house.”</p>
<p>By this point in his narration, I had grown a trifle weary of the young man’s story and interrupted him.</p>
<p>“So this brave fellow also hung himself in the same fashion?”</p>
<p>The young man looked at me, slightly surprised.</p>
<p>“That’s right,” he replied ominously.</p>
<p>“After one man hangs himself, countless others hang themselves in the same place. In other words, this horror boils down to a copycat instinct?”</p>
<p>“Ah, now I see why you’re impatient. That’s not it at all. I wouldn’t waste your time with such a dull story.”</p>
<p>With a look of relief, the young man corrected my misguided assumption.</p>
<p>“It’s not one of those dime-a-dozen stories where people keep dying at an ‘accursed’ train crossing.” </p>
<p>“Forgive my rudeness. Please continue.”</p>
<p>I politely apologized for misunderstanding him.</p>
<p>— 3 —</p>
<p>“The office worker spent three nights alone in that demonic room. But nothing happened. He was beaming with self-satisfaction at having beaten the devil. But I set him straight. ‘All three nights you slept there were overcast, right? The moon didn’t come out, did it?’”</p>
<p>“Oh-ho, was the moon somehow related to those suicides?” I interjected, a bit excited.</p>
<p>“Yes, it was. I’d realized that the spice broker and the renter after him died on nights when the moon was clear. If the moon hadn’t come out, the suicides wouldn’t have happened. For only a few minutes a night, ghostly silver-white light flooded the narrow canyon. That’s when the suicides occurred. It was the witchcraft of moonlight. I was convinced of it.”</p>
<p>As the young man spoke, he raised his wan face and gazed down at the Shinobazu Pond bathed in moonlight.</p>
<p>Reflected in what the young man had called a giant mirror was the scenery surrounding the pond, silver-white and ethereal.</p>
<p>“This is what I am talking about: the bewitching power of moonlight. Moonlight incites dark passions like a cold flame, making hearts burn with the intensity of phosphorus. Mysterious passions that give rise, for example, to ‘songs to the moon.’ You don’t have to be a poet to learn about the transience of life from the moon. If you’ll forgive the expression ‘artistic madness,’ isn’t that how the moon influences us?”</p>
<p>I was slowly becoming annoyed by the young man’s manner of storytelling.</p>
<p>“Are you suggesting that moonlight was responsible for those men’s deaths?”</p>
<p>“That’s right. Half the blame goes to the moonlight. But moonlight alone doesn’t make people take their own lives. If that were so, don’t you think the two of us soaking up the radiance of the moon would be slipping nooses around our necks by now?”</p>
<p>The young man smirked, his face pale as a reflection in a mirror. I couldn’t help feeling like a child listening to a bone-chilling ghost story.</p>
<p>“The brave office worker slept in that accursed room for a fourth night. Unfortunately, the moon was out that night.</p>
<p>“In the middle of the night I suddenly awoke in my bed in the basement and saw the light of the moon streaming in through the tall window above. I don’t know why, but unthinkingly I got up. Still in my pajamas, I raced up the narrow staircase next to the elevator. You can’t imagine the incredible solitude in that building that replaced the activity of the daylight hours. It was a massive graveyard with hundreds of tiny rooms. Take my word for it, it was like the catacombs in Rome. It wasn’t pitch-black –  there were electric lights at key places in the corridors – but those faint lights made it even scarier.</p>
<p>“When at last I reached the dreaded room on the fifth floor, I felt afraid for myself wandering through a deserted building like a sleepwalker. I banged madly on the door and called out the name of the office worker.</p>
<p>“There was no answer within. My own voice merely echoed down the corridor until it disappeared into the solitude. </p>
<p>“I turned the knob and the door readily swung open. On a table in the corner was an electric desk lamp with a green shade that despondently illuminated the room. By its light I could see there was no one inside. The bed was empty. And then I saw that the dreaded window was wide open.</p>
<p>“Outside the window, the building across the way caught the last fleeting rays of faint silvery light from the middle of the fifth floor to the roof. Directly opposite this window was another of the exact same shape, and it, too, had been flung open to form a gaping black hole. The two were identical in every way. Under the mysterious luminosity of the moon, they looked even more alike. </p>
<p>“I was spooked by my fearful premonitions, but I had to make certain, so I poked my head out the window. I didn’t immediately have the courage to look in the direction of the telephone pole, so first I glanced at the distant bottom of the canyon. The moonlight only shone upon the uppermost portions of the building across the way. The gap created by the buildings was pitch-black, which made it appear that it plunged to bottomless depths.</p>
<p>“And then I forcefully twisted my neck all the way to the right. The side of the building was lost in shadows, but thanks to the moonlight reflected from the building across the way I could make out a shape of some kind there. Sure enough, as I directed my gaze that way, what I had anticipated came into view. The legs of a man in black clothes. Wrists dangling limply. Upper body stretched to the limit. A tightly constricted neck. His head drooped until his neck was almost bent in two. The fearless office worker had been caught in the witchcraft of the moon and hung himself from the crossbar of the telephone pole.</p>
<p>“In a panic I yanked my head back in from the window. I suppose I was worried that I, too, would be caught in the same spell. But that’s when I noticed it. No sooner had I begun to pull my head out of the window, what did I spy through the jet-black square hole of the open window across the way but a man’s face staring back! Only the face was immersed in the moonlight, its features standing out in sharp profile. Especially by the light of the moon, it looked yellow and withered, a deformed and despicable face. And I’ll be damned if he wasn’t looking in my direction the whole time!</p>
<p>“In that instant, I stood back and shrunk away from the window. It was altogether too astonishing. I should have explained earlier, but a lawsuit had been filed against the owner of the building across the way by the bank that served as the guarantor, with the result that the building was completely vacant. Not a soul was living there.</p>
<p>“But someone was in that vacant building in the dead of night. Not only that, he had a yellow face like an evil spirit that leered from the window directly across from the dreaded window where the hangings took place. There was nothing ordinary about it. Had I seen a ghost? And was that yellow-faced man with his witchcraft plotting still more hangings?</p>
<p>I went cold with fear, but I didn’t take my eyes off that yellow face across the way. On closer inspection, I could make out he was a scrawny, small-boned man in his fifties. He continued looking in my direction, only to finally laugh broadly as if to signify something. He then abruptly vanished into the darkness of the window. His cackling visage was revolting to behold. When he smiled, his entire face crumpled up, leaving only a mouth stretched fit to bursting.”</p>
<p>— 4 —</p>
<p>“The next day I asked my co-workers and the janitors about the building across the canyon, but since it was completely vacant, not even a night watchman had been there. Had it been a figment of my imagination?</p>
<p>“The police opened tentative investigations into the inexplicable multiple suicides: now three in a row with no rationale whatsoever. However, since there wasn’t a shadow of a doubt that these were suicides, the investigations went no further. But I wasn’t afraid to believe in an unconventional cause. I wasn’t satisfied with the absurd explanation, which held that anyone who slept in that room went crazy. That yellow-faced man was the mastermind. He murdered all three. On each night that a hanging occurred, he was peeping through the identical window directly across the canyon. And he had laughed knowingly. There was something terrible hidden behind that laugh. I was positive of it.</p>
<p>“A week went by uneventfully, and then I made an astonishing discovery. </p>
<p>“One day as I was returning from an errand, I crossed the wide avenue where the entrance of the vacant building was located. Immediately adjacent to it was one of the Mitsubishi buildings, a modest, old-fashioned brick building with tenement-like rental offices. A gentleman bounding lightly up the stone staircase caught my attention.</p>
<p>“He was a delicate-boned older gentleman, with a slight stoop, dressed in a morning coat. From his profile I could swear I’d seen him somewhere before, so I paused to get a better look. He stopped at the entrance to an office, dusted off his shoes and suddenly glanced back in my direction. Shock stopped me right in my tracks. The smartly dressed gentleman was a dead ringer for the yellow-faced monster I’d seen leering through the window of the vacant building a few nights earlier.</p>
<p>“After he disappeared into the office, I noticed a sign written in gold letters by the door: Mera Ophthalmology, Dr. Mera Ryōsai.7 I caught hold of a passing messenger boy and confirmed that the man who had just gone inside was Dr. Mera himself.</p>
<p>“It was beyond comprehension that a medical doctor would sneak into a vacant building in the middle of night, and, what’s more, laugh aloud at the sight of a hanged man. I couldn’t hold back a powerful burst of curiosity. Still, I tried not to let it show as I set about asking as many people as I could about Mera Ryōsai’s past and daily activities.</p>
<p>“Despite his advanced age, Dr. Mera was not very well known, nor did he seem particularly adept at making money, considering that he was working out of a rented office. He was extremely unusual and the way he treated patients was disagreeably rough. Sometimes he even seemed to be touched with madness. He had neither a wife nor children, but had been a bachelor his whole life. His office doubled as his apartment. That’s how I learned that he slept there at night. In addition, I heard rumors he was an extremely avid reader, with a sizable collection of books outside his field of expertise, such as long-forgotten works of philosophy, psychology and criminology. </p>
<p>“ ‘In the private quarters connected to the examination room there’s a glass case filled with fake eyes of every conceivable shape. Hundreds of glass eyes staring back at you. Fake or not, they really give you the creeps. But never mind that – what’s an ophthalmologist doing with a bunch of skeletons and life-sized mannequins?’ That’s what a businessman in my building told me about the hair-raising experience of being examined by Dr. Mera.</p>
<p>“I never failed to observe the doctor’s comings and goings whenever I could. I also spent some time watching the fifth floor window of the empty building, but there was nothing in particular to see. That yellow face never once materialized.</p>
<p>“Any way you looked at it, Dr. Mera was suspicious. The yellow face I saw glaring back from the window across the way that night was undeniably his. But the question was, how was he involved? If those three hangings weren’t suicides, then even supposing Dr. Mera somehow planned those murders, how and why did he pull them off? That was the sticking point. Still, I couldn’t help but remain convinced he was the killer.</p>
<p>“For days it obsessed me. Once I scaled the brick fence behind the doctor’s office, went to the window and stole a peep at the doctor’s private room. Sure enough, the skeletons, mannequin and glass eye case were there.</p>
<p>“One thing I couldn’t figure out was how someone in the building on the other side of the canyon could freely affect a person in my building. Hypnosis? No, that was impossible. I’d heard that a life-threatening order like a command to die wouldn’t work. </p>
<p>“About half a year passed after the last hanging when at last an opportunity arose for me to test my suspicions. Someone rented the cursed room. The renter was a man from Osaka, so he hadn’t the faintest inkling about the ghastly rumors. From the perspective of the building’s managers, the extra money would increase profits, so they kept their mouths shut and rented it to him. I guess no one was ready to believe that now, six months later, the same thing would happen again.</p>
<p>“I for one was solidly convinced that the man was going to hang himself. Somehow it was up to me to prevent it from happening. </p>
<p>“From that day I neglected my work and devoted myself to observing Dr. Mera’s comings and goings. At long last my work paid off. I uncovered the doctor’s secret.”</p>
<p>— 5 —</p>
<p>“On the evening of the third night after the man from Osaka moved in, I watched the doctor’s office and spotted him furtively slip out on foot without his bag for house-calls. Of course I tailed him. Contrary to my expectations, he went into a reputable clothing store in a large building nearby. He selected an off-the-rack suit from their large inventory, paid for it, and brought it straight back to his office.</p>
<p>“Regardless of how indigent a physician he was, Dr. Mera wasn’t the type to wear a ready-made suit. But if the suit was intended for an assistant, why did he buy it himself, and try to avoid being seen doing it? The man was out of his mind. What on earth was that suit for? I stood for a while gazing remorsefully at the entrance to the office into which the doctor had disappeared when I suddenly remembered the fence around back where I could spy into the doctor’s private room. I knew it was a long shot, but maybe I could catch a glimpse of him doing something in there. I quickly ran around to the back of the office.	</p>
<p>“I scrambled over the fence and cautiously peered in. The doctor was there all right. It was obvious that he was up to something truly bizarre. </p>
<p>“You would never guess what that yellow-faced doctor was up to. He took the mannequin, the life-sized one I told you about a minute ago, and put the suit on it. Hundreds of glass eyes bore silent witness.</p>
<p>“A detective novel writer such as yourself probably has a good idea by now what I am about to say. But at the time, I was stunned. The doctor’s evil plans took my breath away.</p>
<p>“I’ll be damned if the suit which the mannequin wore wasn’t an exact duplicate of the one worn by the new renter, right down to the color and striped pattern! The doctor had picked out the same off-the-rack suit and brought it home.</p>
<p>“I knew I had to act soon. It was supposed to be a moonlit night, so another terrible accident might occur. I had to do something, anything. I was at an utter loss, and racked my brains for a solution. Then, I amazed myself by coming up with an ingenious plan. When I tell it to you, you’ll want to shake my hand and congratulate me. </p>
<p>“I made my preparations and waited for night, then carried a large bundle wrapped in a furoshiki cloth up to the cursed room. The new renter had gone home for the night, so the door was locked, but I used the spare key to open the door and enter the room. I put on clothes suitable for the night’s work. I turned on the desk lamp with the green shade, shining it on myself as though I were the room’s true occupant. I wore a suit I borrowed from a co-worker that closely resembled the same striped pattern. I also took care to part my hair in the same fashion to make myself look like the man from Osaka. I sat with my back to the window and patiently waited. </p>
<p>“Needless to say, I took these steps to alert the yellow-faced man across the way to my presence, but I was careful never to look behind me and give him the chance he was waiting for.</p>
<p>“I must have sat there for about three hours. Were my suspicions on target? And would my plans come to fruition? I was very impatient and spent three hours with my heart pounding. At my wit’s end, I wondered if I should turn around. I don’t know how many times I twisted my neck left and right.</p>
<p>“My watch indicated that it was ten minutes past ten o’clock. I heard the hoot-hoot cry of an owl. A-ha, that was the signal. He used an owl call to get his victims to look out the window. Who wouldn’t go for a look if they heard an owl cry in the middle of the Marunouchi? When I realized what was afoot, I hesitated a moment longer, then got up from my seat, walked over to the window frame and opened the glass.</p>
<p>“Bathed in moonlight, the building across the way shimmered silvery gray. As I said before, the building was of identical construction to the one I was in. It was queer to look at them. I’ve tried to convey a sense of it, but there’s really no way for you to understand that crazy feeling. It was as if an absurdly large mirrored wall suddenly sprang up before your eyes, and the building you were in was reflected back down to the last detail. Add some seductive moonlight to that physical double and you start to get the idea.	</p>
<p>“The window where I stood was directly opposite me. It was open, too. And there I was... No, there was something wrong with the mirror. The only thing that didn’t fit was me. Why wouldn’t it reflect me, too? Thoughts like this raced through my head. I couldn’t bear it. It was a trap deadly enough to make my hair stand on end. </p>
<p>“The next thing I knew, I had disappeared somewhere. Only a moment ago I could have sworn I was standing right by the window. I restlessly scanned the other window. I couldn’t help myself.</p>
<p>“And then, with a start, I found my reflection. Only it wasn’t in the window. It was on the wall. I was hanging from the crossbar of the telephone pole by a length of rope.</p>
<p>“‘Ah, that’s where I went. I’m over there.’</p>
<p>“It must sound ridiculous to hear me talk like this. But I can’t express that feeling in words. It was a nightmare... Yes, that’s right, a nightmare in which, try as you might, you still do something against your will. Let’s say you looked in the mirror and even though your own eyes were open, the image reflected back to you had its eyes shut. What would you do? Would you be able to resist shutting your eyes, too?</p>
<p>“Well, I was forced to imitate my reflection in the mirror and hang myself. Across the way I had hanged myself. The real me couldn’t just stand there and watch.</p>
<p>“My hanged body didn’t look the least bit frightening or repulsive. It looked beautiful. Like a picture. I felt the urge to make myself become that beautiful picture. </p>
<p>“It’s possible that without the magic of moonlight, Dr. Mera’s weird trick would have been completely useless.</p>
<p>“Of course you must have figured it out by now, but the doctor’s trick was to dress the mannequin in the same clothes as the occupant of the room and to show it hanging itself from a length of rope attached to the same block of wood on the telephone crossbar. It was actually a very simple affair. </p>
<p>“He used the buildings of perfectly identical construction and seductive moonlight to brilliant effect.</p>
<p>“Even though I knew his trick in advance, I had almost carelessly thrown one leg over the side of the window before I came to my senses and stopped myself. </p>
<p>“I fought against that fearsome compulsion as if I were shaking off the effects of anesthesia. I unraveled the furoshiki cloth which I’d prepared, and unblinkingly watched the opposite window.</p>
<p>“Seconds slowly ticked by... and then my intuition proved correct. That yellow face which belonged to none other than Dr. Mera, appeared suddenly in the window to watch me die.</p>
<p>“I was waiting for him. What would happen if I didn’t snare him in that instant?</p>
<p>“Grasping the object in the furoshiki and holding it up with both hands, I quietly rested it on the edge of the window sill.</p>
<p>“Can you guess what it was? Naturally, it was a mannequin. I borrowed one from the same clothing store and put a morning coat on it similar to the kind Dr. Mera always wore.</p>
<p>“Just then the moonlight was shining close to the bottom of the canyon, and by its pearly-white reflection my window was clearly visible.</p>
<p>“I felt as though I were locked in a duel as I stared at the devil across the way. ‘Come on, you bastard!’ I cursed in my head.</p>
<p>“Would you believe it? God endowed man with the same fate as monkeys, after all. Dr. Mera was caught in the same trap he had devised for others.</p>
<p>“The little old man pathetically straddled the window frame and did just what my mannequin did – he sat right down.</p>
<p>“I was the puppet master.</p>
<p>“I stood behind the mannequin. If I raised its arms, the doctor raised his.</p>
<p>“If I shook its legs, the doctor shook his.</p>
<p>“And what do you think I did next?</p>
<p>“I killed him. </p>
<p>“I gave the mannequin sitting on the windowsill a good shove with all my might. It gave out a hollow clatter and disappeared from view.</p>
<p>“Almost instantaneously, the old man in his morning coat opposite me followed suit. Imitating his reflection, he silently leapt into the night air and plunged to the bottom of the canyon!</p>
<p>“And then, I faintly heard a sound like something had smashed... Dr. Mera was dead.</p>
<p>“As on the previous nights when that yellow face laughed its hideous laugh, I reeled in the string I held in my right hand – the borrowed mannequin I sent over the windowsill rose nimbly and I brought it back inside the room.</p>
<p>“If I had left it lying around, I would have been a prime suspect for murder, don’t you agree?”</p>
<p>His story finished, the young man eerily laughed as I imagine the yellow-faced doctor did. He observed me closely.</p>
<p>“What was Dr. Mera’s motive for murder? I don’t need to tell that to a writer of detective novels such as yourself. You know well enough yourself that even without a motive, a murderer lives to kill.”</p>
<p>The young man got up with an expression that would not countenance a response and quickly walked away.</p>
<p>Moonlight mercilessly flooded over me as I watched him disappear into the misty night. For a while I remained motionless on the sitting stone.</p>
<p>My encounter with the young man, his story, and yes, even the young man himself – were these not created by what he called the “bewitching power” of moonlight? It might have been nothing but an illusion; but then again, who knows?</p>
<p>The Dancing Dwarf</p>
<p>Odoru issun bōshi · 1927</p>
<p>“Hey Roku, what are you waiting for? Why don’cha come here and join us for a drink?”</p>
<p>Standing in front of an open cask of sake, the strongman, who was wearing purple trunks fringed with gold thread over his tights, spoke in a deceptively gentle voice.</p>
<p>There was something suggestive in his manner that attracted the attention of the inebriated men and women in the troupe toward Roku the dwarf. Leaning against a wooden post in a corner of the stage, Roku watched their merrymaking from afar. Good-natured fellow that he was, as usual he curled up his florid mouth at the invitation and grinned.</p>
<p>“Aw, liquor’s no good for me!”</p>
<p>When they heard this, the slightly drunken acrobats laughed as though they had heard something funny. The men’s salty voices and the high-pitched tittering of the fat ladies reverberated throughout the large tent. </p>
<p>“We can tell just by looking at you that you’re a teetotaler. But today’s special, ain’t it? We made a nice heap of change, see, so we’re celebrating. Even a cripple like you can take a swallow now and then.”</p>
<p>Once again the strongman softly repeated his offer. He was an imposing, heavyset man, about forty years old, with dark-colored lips.</p>
<p>“Naw, liquor’s no good for me!” the dwarf responded, still grinning. He was a monster with the body of an eleven- or twelve-year-old child and the face of a man of thirty. His head was round as a doll’s, and deep wrinkles like a spider spreading its legs lined his bulbous face. He had large, bulging eyes and a flat nose. Whenever he laughed, his wide mouth stretched so far on both sides it almost disappeared behind his ears. A sparse, unkempt beard added to his incongruous appearance. His lips stood out a strangely bold red against the pallor of his skin. </p>
<p>“If I pour you a drink, you’ll join us, won’t you Roku?” asked Ohana, the beautiful ball tumbler, in a confident tone, and with a smile playing at her lips, her face slightly reddened from alcohol.</p>
<p>Everyone in the village had Ohana’s name on the tip of their tongue and I was no exception. </p>
<p>The dwarf looked straight at Ohana and winced slightly. A curious expression momentarily crossed his face. Was it a monster’s feeling of shame? But he continued to fidget, until he finally blurted out the same thing.</p>
<p>“Naw, liquor’s no good for me.”</p>
<p>He was still smiling as before, but he spoke in a low voice as though the words stuck in his throat.</p>
<p>“C’mon, don’t say that, have just one drink.”</p>
<p>The strongman strode forward with determination and grabbed the dwarf by the arm.</p>
<p>“Now I’ve got you. There ain’t no getting away now,” he said, and briskly jerked Roku by the arm.</p>
<p>Though he didn’t look well suited for the role of a clown, Roku indignantly protested like a girl of eighteen, grabbing hold of the post and refusing to budge.</p>
<p>“Leggo, leggo!”</p>
<p>The strongman was unrelenting, and before long the post Roku was holding gave way. The interior of the tent shook as though shaken by a strong wind, and the acetylene gas lamp swung like a seesaw.</p>
<p>For some reason I had a bad feeling about it. The sight of the dwarf stubbornly clinging to the post and the strongman no less obstinately struggling to dislodge him gave me a dire foreshadowing of what was to come.</p>
<p>“Ohana, forget about Tom Thumb over there, how’s about a song? Whaddya say, give us a tune.”</p>
<p>To my surprise, this needling request came from the magician beside me. In spite of his long mustaches, which drooped like an inverted V, he spoke with a strangely foppish lisp. An obviously drunk older woman, who looked like a newcomer to the troupe, laughed bawdily and called out in agreement.</p>
<p>“Ohana, now there’s a sharp idea. Let’s make some noise.”</p>
<p>“Great, I’m gonna get some pots and pans for us to bang on,” announced a young acrobat. He, too, was only dressed in a pair of tights. He leapt out of his seat, weaved his way past the struggling dwarf and strongman, and bounded into the second floor dressing room, which was held up by wooden posts. </p>
<p>Without waiting for him to return, the droopy-mustached magician beat the cover of the sake cask, and in a harsh, raucous voice sang a comical sankyoku manzai.1 Two or three of the ball-tumbling girls playfully joined in. In situations like this, the dwarf Roku was always the object of torment. In vulgar tones they wove his name into one verse after another. </p>
<p>Gradually these cheers overtook the troupe’s scattered conversations and partying, until everyone was singing along. Before I knew it, they were being accompanied by a samisen, taiko drum, gong, and wooden clappers, no doubt brought by the young acrobat. The sound was deafening as a giant orchestra, enough to make the tent shake. Roaring voices and handclaps punctuated each verse. Women and men alike became more riotous as the sake flowed.</p>
<p>In the midst of this, the dwarf and the strongman were still going at it. Roku had let go of the post and laughingly leapt back and forth like a little monkey. He was remarkably agile. The burly strongman, who was being made a fool of by the dull-witted dwarf, was losing his temper.</p>
<p>“You little shrimp, wait till I get a hold of you. You’re gonna pay for this,” he thundered as he chased after the dwarf.</p>
<p>“Lemme alone, lemme alone!”</p>
<p>He had the face of a thirty-year-old, but the dwarf fled in panic like a schoolboy. He was desperate to avoid being nabbed by the strongman and getting his head dunked in the sake cask.</p>
<p>The sight of them oddly reminded me of the death scene in Carmen, when fierce music and shouting voices as in a bullfighting arena surround the imbroglio between Jose and Carmen. I don’t know why, but their clothes also made me associate them with Carmen. The dwarf wore the dusky red costume of a jester. The strongman in purple trunks was in pursuit. The samisen, gong, and clappers, not to mention the riotous chorus of voices, were raising the roof.</p>
<p>“Now I’ve got you, you runt!” the strongman roared at last. Poor Roku trembled in his viselike grip, white as a sheet.</p>
<p>“Hey, get outta the way.”</p>
<p>He raised the writhing dwarf over his head and brought him toward us. Everyone stopped singing and looked on. You could hear the two of them panting heavily. </p>
<p>Before we knew it, the upended dwarf’s head had been plunged into the sake cask. Roku’s short arms writhed in mid-air. Sake splashed and sprayed. </p>
<p>The half-naked men and women of the troupe, some dressed in red-and-white striped tights, others in flesh-toned tights, slapped hands and stamped their feet. There was coarse laughter. No one lifted a finger to stop this cruel sport.</p>
<p>After being forced to swallow his fill of sake, the dwarf was flung to one side. He curled up in a ball coughing like a man with the whooping cough. A yellowish fluid gushed from his mouth, nose, and ears. As if to mock his suffering, the sankyoku manzai chorus rose up once more, a torrent of intolerable insults.</p>
<p>When his coughing fit ceased, Ohana danced over the dwarf, who lay there exhausted and half-dead. Her nubile legs frequently straddled him.</p>
<p>The sound of hand clapping, shouting, and wooden clappers assailed the ears. There wasn’t a sane person left in the troupe. They were raving mad to the last man. Ohana danced a savage gypsy dance to the quick tempo of a sankyoku manzai.</p>
<p>Roku eventually managed to open his eyes. His unhappy face was flushed as though from imbibing too much alcohol. His shoulders heaving, he unsteadily rose to his feet. At that very moment, the fatigued ball tumbler’s ample bottom loomed right before the dwarf’s eyes. Whether by accident or conscious design, she fell over on her backside and landed on his face.</p>
<p>His head nearly crushed, Roku let out a plaintive howl and writhed under Ohana’s buttocks. The drunken Ohana pretended to ride horseback on Roku’s face. Matching the beat of the samisen and calling out, “Hey, hey!” she slapped Roku’s cheeks with the flat of her hand. Guffaws exploded from all around. There was noisome clapping. But the suffocated Roku, who lay trapped under her large body, could do nothing but endure the abuse.</p>
<p>When everyone laughed themselves out, the dwarf was released. Sure enough, before long he had a foolish grin on his face and pulled himself up into a sitting position. In a joking tone of voice, he muttered, “You guys are terrible.” </p>
<p>“Who’s up for a game of football?”</p>
<p>The young marksman suddenly screamed. Everyone seemed to know exactly what he had in mind.</p>
<p>“Sounds like fun,” responded one of the acrobats.</p>
<p>“Quit it already, he’s had enough,” the magician with the inverted-V mustache said disapprovingly. Among the troupe, he alone was dressed handsomely, in a fine flannel suit with a red necktie.</p>
<p>The young marksman made his way toward the dwarf as if he had not heard a word the magician said.</p>
<p>“Okay Roku, here we go.”</p>
<p>He wasted no time pulling the cripple up and delivering a vicious open-handed slap right between Roku’s eyes.</p>
<p>Reeling from the blow, the dwarf spun around in a circle like a ball and fell over backwards. A second young man caught the cripple by the shoulder and pulled him forward, only to slap him again in the forehead. Poor Roku wobbled in the opposite direction and landed back in the hands of the first young man. This cruel and bizarre game of catch was repeated more times than I cared to count.</p>
<p>At some point the chorus broke into a folk song, briskly accompanied by samisen and wooden clappers. The dizzy dwarf wore an implacable smile on his face as he kept up his strange role.</p>
<p>“Cut out the disgusting behavior already. Let’s see everyone show off their talents,” cried someone weary of tormenting the cripple.</p>
<p>This suggestion was received with wild-sounding cries of assent and thunderous applause.</p>
<p>“None of the usual stunts. It’s gotta be the stuff you keep hidden up your sleeve. Anyone got a problem with that?” the strongman in the purple trunks commanded.</p>
<p>“First joke’s on Roku,” someone added spitefully. </p>
<p>There was a smattering of applause. Exhausted and on the verge of collapse, Roku nevertheless greeted this sadistic proposal with his indefatigable smile. He smiled even when he should have been crying.</p>
<p>“I have an idea,” the beautiful tumbler Ohana cried, and unsteadily stood up. </p>
<p>“Tom Thumb. You’re going to do Mustache’s magic trick. Come on, take a stab at the Beauty in the Guillotine Box. Have you got the guts?”</p>
<p>“Heh-heh-heh.” The dwarf stared into Ohana’s face and started to cackle. The alcohol he’d been forced to drink made his eyes shine strangely.</p>
<p>“Hey Tom, you love me, don’t you? If I give you an order, you have to do whatever I say. I’m going to climb into that box. Can you handle it?”</p>
<p>“Oh-ho, look at the lusty little fellow!”</p>
<p>Yet again there was tremulous applause and laughter.</p>
<p>The unusual prospect of Tom Thumb and Ohana performing the Beauty in the Guillotine Box amused the drunken troupe. To the rowdy stamping of feet, they began setting up the equipment for the trick. The black curtain was drawn across the front of the stage. There was a black mat on the floor. A wooden box the shape of a coffin and a table were brought in. </p>
<p>“Start the show!”</p>
<p>Samisen, gong, and wooden clappers provided the customary prelude. On cue Ohana and her sidekick appeared on stage. Ohana wore a skintight, flesh-toned leotard. Roku was dressed in his baggy red jester’s costume. And as always, there was a grin on his wide mouth.</p>
<p>“Deliver the prologue!” someone yelled.</p>
<p>“Oh brother, I dunno what to say,” the dwarf mumbled as he collected himself and began an introduction.</p>
<p>“Er, ladies and gentleman, we are about to present the amazing magic trick called the Beauty in the Guillotine Box. The young lady here will climb into the box at my side. I will take fourteen genuine Japanese swords and insert them one at a time from all sides. But, uh, that wouldn’t quite be enough entertainment. So we are gonna lop off the young lady’s neck and put her severed head on the table. Ahem.”</p>
<p>“Brilliant, brilliant!” </p>
<p>“Great impersonation!”</p>
<p>It was difficult to tell whether the cries interspersed with raucous hand clapping were real praise or jeers.</p>
<p>Although the dwarf looked like an imbecile, this was his true calling, and his speech on stage was impressive. From his intonation to phrasing, there was virtually no difference from the mustached magician who always did it.</p>
<p>The beautiful ball tumbler Ohana gave a flirtatious little bow, and disappeared with feline grace into the coffin-like box. The dwarf shut the lid and secured the large bolt.</p>
<p>More than a dozen Japanese swords lay in a pile on stage. One by one Roku picked them up and stuck them into the floor to prove they weren’t fake. Then he began to thrust them into the open holes around the box. With each sword came a terrible shriek from inside the box – the same horrible screams which the audiences heard daily.</p>
<p>“Help, oh, please help me! Oh God, the brute really wants to kill me! Oh no, oh, help me, please help!”</p>
<p>“Ha-ha-ha!”</p>
<p>“Brilliant, brilliant!”</p>
<p>“Great impersonation!”</p>
<p>Each person in the audience expressed his or her approval with shouts and hand clapping.</p>
<p>One, two, three... Gradually one sword after another went into the box.</p>
<p>“You finally figured it out, you ugly wench?” The dwarf started in again with his routine. “You made a fool of me one too many times. Now you know what it feels like to be a cripple, doncha?”</p>
<p>“Oh no, oh, please help, someone help me!”</p>
<p>The box plugged full of swords trembled like a live thing.</p>
<p>The audience was riveted by this truly menacing performance. There was a thunderclap of applause.</p>
<p>Finally the fourteenth sword slid into the box. Ohana’s screams changed to the cries of the mortally wounded, then diminished to shallow gasps. Soon these too gave out, and the quivering box went stock-still. </p>
<p>With heaving shoulders, the dwarf took deep breaths and stared at the box. His face was drenched with sweat as though a cup of water had been poured over it. For a long interval he did not move a muscle.</p>
<p>The audience went strangely quiet. The only sound to break the silence was the rough breathing of drunken people. </p>
<p>Eventually Roku roused himself and picked up the cleaver which had been specially set aside. It had a wide, serrated edge like a Chinese halberd. This, too, he lightly embedded in the floor to show its bite, then released the bolts on the box and raised the lid. With the cleaver in hand, he reached into the box. A grisly chopping sound issued forth as though he were actually chopping off her head. </p>
<p>Striking a mie pose2 to show he had cut off her head, he threw down the cleaver. Concealing something in his arms, he walked over to the table at his side and plunked it down on the tabletop.</p>
<p>When he lifted his arms, Ohana’s gruesome severed head came into view. Red blood poured from the lacerated area. No one dared to imagine the blood was fake.</p>
<p>A sensation cold as ice ran down my back and set the hair on my neck standing on end. I knew that there were two mirrors at right angles under the table, and that Ohana’s body was hidden inside a trap door in the floor. The magic trick had been performed much as it always is. The question is, what gave me this fearful sense of foreboding? Was it the dwarf’s foul countenance that belied his usually meek demeanor?</p>
<p>The dwarf in his red jester’s costume, with arms outstretched, was superimposed against the black background like a scarlet blot. At his feet lay the bloodstained cleaver. He turned to the audience, his face wordlessly filled with triumph. But what was that faint sound? Could it be the clattering of teeth from his chalk-white face?</p>
<p>The audience bit their tongues. They furtively exchanged glances as though they were seeing something they could not believe. The strongman sprang to his feet. He took two or three bounds straight for the table. Obviously he couldn’t bear to wait any longer.</p>
<p>“Ha-ha-hah!”</p>
<p>Suddenly there came a lively woman’s laugh.</p>
<p>“Tom Thumb really had you spooked. Ha-ha-hah!”</p>
<p>Of course it was Ohana’s voice. Her bluish head laughed on the tabletop. The dwarf abruptly swung around and concealed it in his arms. He then hurried directly back stage behind the black curtain. All that remained was the trick table.</p>
<p>The audience was so overwhelmed by the dwarf’s performance that for a while they did nothing but catch their breath. Even the magician stood slack-jawed in astonishment. But it only took a single shout to rock the tent.</p>
<p>“Let’s raise him up on our shoulders for a cheer!”</p>
<p>At this the entire troupe rushed behind the black curtain. In the heat of the moment, several of the drunken acrobats lost their footing and toppled over in a heap. One pulled himself up and staggered ahead. Some of the troupe members were already out cold around the empty sake cask like fish tossed up on a riverbank. </p>
<p>“Hey, Roku!”</p>
<p>I heard someone calling to him from behind the black curtain.</p>
<p>“Roku, you don’t have to hide. Come on out!” someone else shouted.</p>
<p>“Ohana!” a woman shouted.</p>
<p>There was no reply.</p>
<p>I shook with unspeakable fear. Was that the real Ohana whose laugh we heard? Or had that inscrutable freak blocked off the trap door in the floor in order to actually murder her and cut off her head? Didn’t it occur to those foolish acrobats that it wasn’t the voice of the dead woman, but a breathing technique he used to project his voice? He could have used this weird art with his mouth shut to produce a sound from his abdomen as though it was the dead woman speaking. I wondered if there was any way to find out whether that monster had mastered such a skill. </p>
<p>Before I knew it, the tent was filled with a thin layer of smoke. It was unlikely the acrobats’ cigarettes caused the blaze. Without further thought I raced for a corner of the spectator’s seats. </p>
<p>As I feared, reddish-black flames were lapping at the foot of the tent. They had already spread to all four corners.</p>
<p>I crawled under the burning canvas and made for open space. A broad expanse of fields was bathed in white moonlight. I trusted my legs and ran for the nearest house.</p>
<p>When I looked behind me, all but a third of the tent had gone up in flames. By now the fire had spread to the base of the posts and the wooden slats of the spectator seats.</p>
<p>“Ha-ha-ha-ha!”</p>
<p>I could hear the drunken acrobats laughing insanely from amidst the flames. What they were laughing at, I never knew.</p>
<p>Who could it be? Atop a hill near the tent a figure like a child danced with his back to the moon. He frolicked madly, holding something round like a watermelon at his side as one would a lantern. </p>
<p>Overcome with fear, I stood frozen to the spot watching the strange black shadow. </p>
<p>He took the round object at his side in both hands and brought it up to his mouth. Stamping the ground, he began to gnaw on that watermelon-like thing. He took leisurely bites, and continued dancing with joy.</p>
<p>The frenzied dance of the shadowy figure flickered black under the liquid moonlight. A thick, black fluid could be clearly seen dripping from the round object he held in his hands.</p>
<p>The Essays</p>
<p>The Horrors of Film</p>
<p>Eiga no kyōfu · 1926</p>
<p>I am terrified of moving pictures. They are the dreams of an opium addict. From a single inch of film emerge giants who fill the whole theater. They laugh, they cry, they get angry, and they fall in love. Swift’s vision of a land of giants exquisitely unfolds before our eyes. </p>
<p>A massive face a thousand times larger than mine suffuses the screen. Then it looks in my direction and laughs. I can only imagine, what if it were my own face up there! For the most part, film actors keep a firm grasp on their sanity. But have you ever seen your face reflected in a concave mirror? Even a face as smooth as a newborn baby’s appears distorted and bizarre; the sort of thing you might spy through a telescope on the surface of the moon. Skin like fish scales, pores deep as caves – concave mirrors are fearsome indeed. Film actors constantly have to stare into them. It’s truly a wonder they don’t lose their minds.</p>
<p>When a projectionist sits all alone in the darkened projection room showing films to an empty theater, you can be sure he is conducting test runs of the movies. There is no music, no one to explain the story and no one in the audience. Save for the clacking of the film projector handle and the sound of his breath, there is perfect silence. The projectionist is face to face with the giants on the screen. If a face in a close-up heaves a sigh, he can practically hear it. If it roars with laughter, its voice seems to resonate like thunder. When we watch a movie from the first row of seats with our eyes only a few feet away from the screen, we experience the same kind of horror. In general this happens when the benshi’s1 explanation breaks off and the musical accompaniment also stops. At such times we can almost hear the giants breathing.</p>
<p>In the middle of a screening, the projection machine sometimes breaks down and the film reel suddenly stops in its tracks. Giants who until that moment were alive on screen fossilize in the blink of an eye – instantaneous extinction. A living human being is abruptly transformed into an inanimate puppet. When I see this happen during a movie, it gives me such a shock that I have an uncontrollable urge to jump out of my seat and run away. It is terrifying when a living thing suddenly goes dead.</p>
<p>It may sound like an excessively pragmatic concern, but there is another cause for alarm: film is made of extremely flammable material. When film gets stuck, the heat from the lens focused on the film can start a fire. The whole reel goes up in flames, and it isn’t unheard of for this to cause a devastating fire that razes the building. Whenever I see the giants on screen fossilize in place, I immediately associate it with the theater burning to the ground and I can’t repress a frightful shudder.</p>
<p>And have you ever had this sort of experience?</p>
<p>Once I went to see an old movie in a small, dirty movie shack in a seedy neighborhood. The film was already so badly damaged from having passed through the projection machine dozens of times that in every single scene it looked as though a heavy rain were falling. Maybe it had something to do with the way the scenes progress in time, but the film moved so slowly it hurt your eyes. The giants on screen were lumbering heavily as if they had been doused with poison gas. I noticed their movements gradually becoming slower and slower, and then something must have jammed, for without warning the projection suddenly stopped altogether. What previously had been a woman was now but a close-up of a face, frozen on the verge of laughing.</p>
<p>When I saw this, a sense of foreboding set my heart racing. Sure enough, just as I was saying to myself that they had better hurry up and turn off the electricity before her face caught fire, a black spot formed on the woman’s lips. Like storm clouds that gather at dusk, it began to spread. When the burning area reached about a foot in length, a reddish flame appeared for the first time. The giantess’ lips burned the color of blood. Instead of laughing, flames curled back her lips and I could have sworn she’d begun to sneer derisively. When the flames were finished licking at her lips, they steadily rose toward her nose and eyes. The actual film might have only been scorched for one or two minutes, but on screen a wide circle had formed, the projection of a swelling firetrap. I got the feeling that the entire theater would soon be engulfed by a raging inferno.</p>
<p>There is nothing more frightening than watching a burning movie. But it is not fire alone that alarms me. A single speck of red materializes out of the monochrome lights and shadows of the movie screen to devour the human figures like an alien terror.</p>
<p>And have you ever experienced the fear that comes from a movie filmed at high speeds? </p>
<p>It is a world utterly different from our own, one whose mysteries can never be seen in real life. The air is heavy like mercury. Humans and animals alike force their way through the heavy atmosphere, slowly staggering forward. It is a fearsome and impenetrable climate.</p>
<p>Once I saw a picture filmed in this manner. In the upper half of the screen, murky water lay stagnant. In the lower half, lifeless seaweed gathered in an inky black tangle. It looked just like a photograph of the ocean floor where innumerable snakes were jostling one another and poking about with their heads. But nothing actually moved. The scene was shot with no action at all, almost to the point of boring the audience to death. But then, from within the seaweed, something black emerged with gentle ripples. It appeared to be some kind of seaweed. Just as I started to wonder what it could be, something white appeared under the rustling black mass and darted ahead like an arrow. It took my breath away. Before I could regain my composure, the face of a woman had come into view and filled the screen. She was stark naked with disheveled hair like a morass of algae, and her body thrashed in all directions. The dance of drowning began right before my eyes.</p>
<p>While sea bathing, I have often experienced the marvel of seeing a person submerged in the water from the same underwater perspective. It is a mysterious sensation similar to that which comes from watching a movie filmed at high speeds.</p>
<p>This is another terror I discovered at a movie shack in a seedy part of town. At the entrance, the customers were handed simple pairs of eyeglasses that are made by inserting strips of red celluloid into the right side of a paper frame, and blue in the left. Without any idea what was in store for me, I accepted a pair and headed inside the theater. A large signboard with the words POP-OUT PHOTOGRAPHS had been placed in front of the stage. Ah, of course, I reassured myself, it’s just a set-up that uses the principles of a stereoscope to create the illusion of depth in movies. Yet this foreknowledge made it even harder for me to sit through the earlier portions of the program.</p>
<p>Finally the show came around to the pop-out photographs. At first glance they were just blotches of red and blue without discernible form (all the same, they were still a little thrilling to behold) but when viewed through the colored glasses we were given at the door, they became well-defined shapes with depth. Up to that point, everything was quite as it ought to be, without any surprises. But as the film continued, truly bizarre phenomena began to occur. </p>
<p>The photographs were simple enough – a person or animal would appear on screen, then loom toward the audience or thrust something they held in their hands at us. The vast majority of scenes were shot using only the slightest movements. For instance, a man appeared and slowly pointed an exceptionally long wooden pole at the audience. To some degree, the pole appeared to extend out from the screen. The image seemed to have depth, but it merely sank back into the screen (in this respect, it created the same effect as that of an ordinary stereoscope). However, when elongated beyond a certain point, the tip of the pole broke free from the screen, and gradually projected toward the audience. It passed over the heads of the spectators sitting in the front rows and continued moving through the air. It kept stretching forward just like the wand of a magician in a fairy tale. Overcome with fear I automatically tore off the glasses, whereupon it all reverted back to the senseless movement of red and blue blotches on the screen.</p>
<p>When I put the glasses back on, the tip of the pole had already stretched within two or three inches of my eyes. Yet even then it continued to grow little by little. It was two inches away, then an inch away, then a tenth of an inch, until finally, before I knew it, the tip of the pole was penetrating my eyes. </p>
<p>Similarly, a fearsome beast would lunge forward, water sprayed from a hose on screen would drench my glasses, and even more terrifyingly, a skull would float through the darkness and crash into my forehead. These are all but a single kind of illusion. Yet when seen through specially colored glasses, they open up the mysteries of a weird, gloomy world from which, struggle as you might, you can never awaken. When the movie was over, my underarms were soaked with cold sweat as though I had just witnessed a horrible nightmare and I couldn’t shake an uncanny sense of unease. </p>
<p>It is a common practice to connect segments of leftover negative film to the ends of a film reel to prevent them from becoming damaged. When we least expect it, the negatives suddenly appear on screen. For example, take a dramatic movie that is supposed to finish with the usual happy ending. The audience gets quite worked up as the movie builds to a climax and then winds to a close. But just as they are about to applaud, a weird spectacle is projected before their eyes. It is the scenery and characters of negative film (for whom light and dark are completely reversed), which have nothing whatsoever to do with the plot of the movie.</p>
<p>The most fearsome aspect of this is when it involves a close-up of a person. Like a huge statue of Buddha, an apparition in white clothes with a head of white hair writhes on screen. Of course, the face is pitch black with gaping white holes where its eyes, nose and mouth should be. The person scarcely seems to be human. When confronted by images like this, I experience the same kind of terror as when a film suddenly stops, or maybe something worse still. Movies truly produce monstrous creatures.</p>
<p>The horrors of film. Whether they intended to or not, we could say that the inventors of moving pictures  stumbled upon a disturbing new sensation for the modern world.</p>
<p>Spectral Voices</p>
<p>Koe no kyōfu · 1927</p>
<p>In the same way that people imagine that shadows can break away from human beings, I find the idea of a voice in the abstract sense – a voice separated from its source – quite disconcerting. It would be extremely frightening to see black shadows on their own swaggering along the pavement in Ginza under the blazing midday sun. Yet it would be just as worrisome if you were walking along in a desolate field somewhere, and out of the blue a voice whispered “Hello.” Twist and turn as you might, there would be no sign of life. There is nothing quite as unsettling as that.</p>
<p>When I was a boy my mother would often scare me by telling me stories about echoes.1 I didn’t yet know how they were really caused, but that only served to grant them a feeling of greater mystery. If someone shouts “Hey!” in the mountains, the strongest echo calls back “Hey!” Then the second strongest echo responds by calling out “Hey!” in a slightly softer voice. The third, fourth, fifth, and so on repeat the call in progressively softer voices, until at last it fades out entirely. As a child I believed an echo was a living thing. It frightened me to think of a living thing without solid form, neither male nor female.2</p>
<p>Auditory hallucinations are probably the most popular topic related to spectral voices. In most cases ghosts appear as visual manifestations, but there are also quite a few instances of auditory spirits; in other words, poltergeists that are nothing but a voice. Among Poe’s prose poems, there is one called “Shadow” in which a ghost appears as a preternaturally large shadow and an eerie voice. In inimitable fashion, Poe brings together the two most fearsome phenomena in the world: shadows and disembodied voices. It goes without saying that his method of depicting this voice in writing is truly brilliant.</p>
<p>And then did we, the seven, start from our seats in horror, and stand trembling, and shuddering, and aghast, for the tones in the voice of the shadow were not the tones of any one being, but of a multitude of beings, and, varying in their cadences from syllable to syllable, fell duskly upon our ears in the well remembered and familiar accents of many thousand departed friends.</p>
<p>One might also consider two phenomena tantamount to psychological experiments: the altogether remarkable practices of staring into a transparent medium and of listening to seashells. The former is often used in the West for fortune telling. Gazing deeply into a crystal ball or glass globe, one gradually sees the substance of one’s thoughts emerge. Transparent spheres have an air of mystery about them, so they are admirably suited for gaining access to the unconscious. Experimentation with the latter is as easy as picking up a seashell that has washed ashore from the ocean floor and putting it to one’s ear. According to the logic of resonance, the sound of waves seems to originate from within the shell. Even though it is nothing more than an auditory hallucination, if one persists in listening long enough, one starts to hear actual words coming out. These phenomena are easily explained by psychology, but there is a quality about them which calls to mind ghost stories.</p>
<p>Auditory hallucinations also occur when one’s nerves get a bit frayed. Ringing in the ears is a type of hallucination that, over time, can turn into words. Occasionally I have had this happen to me. A sound in my ears like a distant steam whistle gradually becomes the buzzing of a bee, then gets considerably worse as the noise starts to take on meaning. A voice speaking more quickly than is possible in real life cries “FASTER, FASTER, FASTER!” But just then, it turns about-face and with extreme lethargy mutters “STUPID, STUPID...” If one took this a step further, one could almost believe it was a true auditory hallucination, that is, the voice of a ghost.</p>
<p>Next we come to ventriloquism. In Japan this is called hachinin gei, or “the skills of eight men.” 3  One technique often perfected by magicians is to keep the mouth closed and issue sounds through the nostrils. Depending on the method, the ventriloquist can project his voice to make it sound as though it is coming from far away. It’s quite remarkable to hear strange noises hailing from the rafters of the theater. The opposite of these fearsome voices is the exposure of their secret by lip-reading. This kind of reversal is one of the great attractions of detective fiction.</p>
<p>Many strange thrills accompany the wonders of civilization. I suppose it is fair to say that one part of our curiosity about science originates with these thrills. For instance, take telescopes and microscopes. When I peer into them, I get chills up and down my spine. It is the same with motion pictures. Tanizaki Junichirō masterfully portrayed the horrors of film in his short story, “The Boil with a Human Face.” With respect to the abstracted voice, we can think of the phonograph, the telephone, and radio. When Edison invented the phonograph, he secretly set it up in his drawing room, and used it to play pranks on his friends. Human speech would suddenly emanate from a room without a soul in it. His friends did not know about the device, so they were extremely surprised. They experienced the fear of spectral voices.</p>
<p>If you think about it, there is also something oddly fascinating about the telephone. Its voices are also disembodied. The telephone features prominently in foreign detective novels. One story I found interesting involved a room in which a person had been murdered. Despite the fact that the person was clearly dead, when the private detective burst into the room, a weird voice wafted from the corpse. It was an absolutely terrifying sound like hissing, and had a ghostly quality to it. But after a closer inspection, it turned out that the victim expired while struggling to call the police, and the telephone was still off the hook. The detective realized that the hissing sounds were coming from the telephone’s mouthpiece as the man on the other line loudly demanded, “What’s going on, what’s wrong?” It was a rather thrilling development.</p>
<p>The radio has a similarly frightening aspect. Voices travel through thin air across tens of thousands of miles. When there is nothing being broadcast, you can get a queer sensation if you put your ear to the receiver and listen for a long time. Without warning you suddenly hear sounds like sparks from a train. When that happens, it gives you a crazy feeling that makes you wonder if some prankster out there unaffiliated with the broadcasting agencies isn’t purposely sending wild sounds over the airwaves at these obscure times.</p>
<p>Speaking of the radio, I once heard that the amount of rainfall in American cities changed because of radio transmissions. Likewise I was also told that at the summit of a tall mountain somewhere, there is a sign that reads, “NO TALKING IN LOUD VOICES.” The reason was that, due to atmospheric conditions, loud voices will cause rain to fall at the foot of the mountain. I know it’s a lot of baloney, but wouldn’t it make a fantastic story if that were true?</p>
<p>Well, I’ve run on a bit too long and used up my allotted space, but let me say it one more time: remarkable things can happen just by isolating the voice. </p>
<p>A Passion for Lenses</p>
<p>Renzu shikōshō · 1937</p>
<p>I think it was around my first year of junior high school that I suffered from chronic depression and isolated myself in my room upstairs. My condition made me shy away from sunlight, so against my family’s entreaties I kept the window blinds shut tight and sat in the darkness dreaming about the cosmos. Back then there was a popular book of astronomy on my father’s bookshelf from which I learned about the vastness of the universe and the smallness of the Earth. I also felt the insignificance of a person like me, which may partly have exacerbated my condition, for I took no interest in my studies and thought of nothing but the heavens. What really gripped my imagination were the celestial bodies beyond the solar system, which could not be seen with the unaided eye.</p>
<p>One day as I lay there listlessly in the dark, I unexpectedly became aware that the scenery from outdoors was being cast upon the shōji screen through a pinhole in the blinds. The verdant branches of a tree dense with foliage were reflected in such a way that virtually every single leaf was delineated with extreme detail and clarity. The tiles of the roof also appeared to be of a different, altogether more radiant color than when seen with the naked eye. Below the tiles and the leaves on the tree (the scenery was reflected on the screen upside-down) came the glorious color of the vast sky. Interspersed within this shade of blue, like the painted backgrounds of pictures in the Panorama Building,1 were fluffy white clouds that slowly crept along like bugs.</p>
<p>For a long interval I enjoyed this projection in miniature before I finally stood up and opened the shōji. The scene followed the movement of the paper screen, dwindling to half, then one third, before disappearing altogether. Now the tiny hole reflecting the scenery became a single, milky-white birch tree that cut the darkened room slantwise, throwing a white-hot spot onto the tatami mats. </p>
<p>I stared at this birch tree composed entirely of light. What I initially saw as milky-white was actually formed by innumerable specks of swirling dust. Dust can be a beautiful thing. Looking closely, I saw its brilliance reflected like so many tiny rainbows. A single speck, perhaps a bit of lint, shone red as a ruby, while another possessed the deep blue of clear skies. Yet another bore the purple of a peacock’s plumage.           </p>
<p>Back then my father worked as a patent attorney, and he kept in his study a large magnifying lens about four or five inches in diameter for examining diagrams of intricate machinery and plans of that sort. By pure chance I happened to have brought it up to my room some time earlier. Now I carelessly picked it up and held it before the ray of light cast through the hole in the blinds. I fooled around as children are wont to do, focusing the lens to set fire to paper and other games, when I noticed a vague but monstrously large creature crawling across the wooden boards of the ceiling.</p>
<p>It appeared to be some kind of monster. Thinking it was a hallucination, I started to panic and wonder if I was losing my mind. Yet when I went in for a closer look, it turned out to be nothing at all. The spot on the tatami was cast in a circle by the ray of light through the aperture in the blinds, and by chance I had been holding the lens horizontally right over where the light streamed in. As a result, it was magnified and projected several hundred times larger onto the ceiling.</p>
<p>The woven strands of rushes that formed the surface of the tatami appeared as wide as the boards in the ceiling. Mostly they were yellow, but were also possessed of a greenish hue. They were projected all too clearly like a terrible nightmare or the drug-induced visions of an opium fiend. Even though I knew it was a play of the lens, I felt peculiarly upset. I suppose most people would think it odd to feel frightened. But I was overwhelmed by its reality. It was so shocking that from that day onward, my view of things changed completely. It was a turning point in my life.</p>
<p>I am not exaggerating in the least. I lack the courage to stand in front of a concave mirror and see it reflect things back a dozen or more times larger. Whenever I come across a concave mirror, I run in the opposite direction. In the same way, I have to gradually steel my courage to peer into a microscope. The magic of lenses is more terrifying to me than most people could possibly imagine. And it is this same fear that instills in me a greater sense of astonishment and wonder than the average person.</p>
<p>I was always fond of telescopes, cameras and projection machines, but for the first time in my life on that fateful day I felt the terror and enchantment of lenses. It happened close to thirty years ago, but it is still vividly imprinted in my memory. To this day my enthusiasm has not diminished one iota. I entertained myself by playing with lenses as a boy, so when I started to write “The Hell of Mirrors” 2 and other works that have to do with optics, I based them in part upon my childhood experiences. I bought a telescope for my own children when they were almost finished with elementary school. As is often the case, the parent became more enthusiastic than the children, and I would spend hours gazing through it. Likewise, I had fun with my children experimenting with a small movie camera. </p>
<p>Only two or three months ago, one of the Tokyo newspapers (I can’t remember which) admirably reported that a two hundred inch astronomical telescope in America was halfway toward completion. I should like to praise the editor of that newspaper. Articles about war, foreign affairs, and the stock market are not the only things that should be considered newsworthy. A two hundred inch lens can magnify our view of the cosmos considerably. The scope of human vision will expand tremendously. It will become possible to see what was once impossible to behold. It will be a momentous occasion, as though the whole human race, once blind, is granted the gift of sight. Its importance is unrivalled by any war.</p>
<p>We have not yet even begun to appreciate the new wonders of the universe revealed to us by the one hundred inch telescope on Mount Wilson. It is no overstatement to say that in a single turn it has changed our outlook on the universe. Now along comes a two hundred inch lens, a dozen times larger in size than a tatami mat. When this brilliant device is ready, what new spectacles await us? What effects will this lens have on our view of the cosmos, on physics, on philosophy? The newspaper indicated that it would take another three years before it was ready. But even without being able to gaze directly into it myself, the mere prospect of hearing from the scientists who will makes me look forward to that day.</p>
<p>The Phantom Lord</p>
<p>Gen’ei no jōshu · 1936</p>
<p>The other day I received a postcard with return postage from a certain magazine asking, “What was the most interesting crime story covered in the newspapers this year?” In reply, I wrote: “I have never taken that kind of interest in actual events. The only thing I see when I look at tragic events is human suffering.”</p>
<p>A while back there were some crime cases that were particularly hard to crack, and it became a fad for newspaper reporters to make the rounds asking detective writers for their opinions. Naturally for someone such as myself, who does not generally comment on the so-called society page, this was extremely disturbing. For the most part, I wound up turning the tables on the reporters who came to interview me, and asked them all sorts of unseemly questions.</p>
<p>“I bet you must take lots of hints for your stories from real crime cases.” I get asked this sort of thing by people all the time. I invariably reply, “No, never. There is no relationship whatsoever between real events and my detective stories. They occupy completely different worlds. I don’t see anything interesting in true crime stories.”</p>
<p>Knowledgeable old men sometimes ask me if I’ve heard the unusual incident of such-and-such, and then kindly tell me their stories. Their manner of storytelling is often skillful and the stories themselves keep you on the edge of your seat, so I’m sure many people would find them fascinating. But I don’t enjoy listening to true stories except from the standpoint of performance. I live irredeemably in a world of fantasy. I may be fond of Taisō Yoshitoshi’s sadistic pictures,1 but I don’t take pleasure in gazing at actual blood. Looking at photographs from crime scenes makes me sick to my stomach.</p>
<p>For me the daylight world is but an illusion; the dreams of a night are real. That is where my true life lies. Poe once wrote something to this effect.2</p>
<p>Many years ago Tanizaki Junichirō wrote a poem on a scroll for me, and to this day it hangs in the alcove of my drawing room. </p>
<p>Night flies on blackbird’s wingsShades of a dream – What is a shadow seen in daylight?</p>
<p>I feel it has a certain resonance with Poe’s words, and I cherish it dearly.</p>
<p>In Dostoevsky’s The Landlady, the protagonist, Ordynov, is described as follows: “Even as a child he had had a reputation for oddity, and had been unlike his companions... because of his strange, unsociable character he had suffered the inhumanity and crude taunts of his fellow children.” 3 I happened to be reading this novel recently, so I had it on hand to quote from, but characters like this recur throughout Dostoevsky’s works. </p>
<p>I experienced a wave of nostalgia when I came across that passage in The Landlady. It brought back memories of my own childhood. Children are very sensitive to “inhumanity and crude taunts,” and though they might walk about expressionless as a Noh mask or put on a friendly facade, underneath they burn with hatred at the real world. </p>
<p>When I was a boy, I had a habit of mumbling to myself for long stretches as I wandered alone down the dark streets at night. For a time I lived exclusively in the lands evoked by Sazanami Sanjin’s World Fairy Tales.4 It was a world of exotic places set in the distant past, and it had a more vibrant reality than the children’s games we played during the daytime. I preferred the reality of this land of fantasy to the real world. At night I would whisper out loud, creating voices for the characters that peopled this land. If someone called out to me, the spell would be broken, and I instinctively knew I had to return to what I considered strange and disagreeable. In such instances the vitality would drain from me, and I would timidly adopt an innocent appearance.</p>
<p>My journeys to this exhilarating land were made aboard the vessel of the printed word. Indeed, the printed word itself possessed the mysteries of that faraway place. From the characters themselves, I was next drawn to printing type itself. It seemed to me that those stolid, square blocks of lead and other metallic alloys were different from everything else on earth. They created an invaluable bridge to the land of dreams. I have always had a weakness for “the romance of the printed word.”</p>
<p>In order to save up enough money to buy my first collection of printing type, I had to prove to my parents that I could exercise self-discipline for six months. I can’t remember precisely what I had to do, but I think I promised to get up bright and early every morning. On the last day I received a large allowance as a reward from my father. I took it and ran to the only type shop in town. They packed up for me a small mountain’s worth of #4 type,5 the glistening type replete with the cozy smell of freshly cast metal. With the help of a friend, I carried several cedar cases of type back to my four-and-a-half mat tatami room at home.</p>
<p>I spent the lion’s share of the money purchasing type, composing cases, and a can of ink, so I had to make do with a handmade printing press. I remembered seeing one made of wood in the window of the neighborhood business card shop. </p>
<p>I wrote the manuscript for a fairy tale, assembled the type like a compositor, and set it like a typesetter.  I inked the type with the roller, and applied as much pressure to the paper as I could muster with the hand press. I will never forget the wonderful feelings of delight from this simple act. Before I knew it, I had come into ownership of a ship to that vibrant land. I was at the helm of a glorious ship. </p>
<p>For a boy weak in social graces and physical strength, I knew it was impossible for me to become the king of a real castle here on earth, but in the land of my imagination, I could build a phantom castle and become its lord. Even the neighborhood bully couldn’t do a thing to wreck a castle in the air. It would never even occur to a blockhead like him to climb up the clouds that led the way there.</p>
<p>When a dreamer grows up without anything standing in his way, it’s only to be expected that he will show no interest in events in the real world. He doesn’t care whether the things he writes make the world better or worse. That’s a whole different world from the one he is concerned with. If stories had to be written like political treatises appealing to the betterment of mankind, no doubt he would hate fiction just as much as “reality.”</p>
<p>When I got older, I had to learn the ways of the world (sooner or later I had to come back down to earth; being forced to leave the land of dreams made me shake my fists in fury). I went off to learn a trade. I was head clerk first in a trading firm, then of a large company. The work itself wasn’t difficult. Rather, it was incredibly painful to be a pawn in an ordinary castle on earth and pretend to enjoy this reality. If you are not fixated with reality (or at least make an appearance of it), you won’t last long at a commercial enterprise. </p>
<p>From dawn to dusk I spent my time in the real world. Only in my dreams at night could I indulge my fantasies. I knew I needed more time away from the real world. Unable to take pleasure in conversing with my colleagues, I spent a great deal of time in dreary silence, which must have seemed odd. But mindful of my co-workers’ feelings, I couldn’t lose myself in becoming a phantom lord. My stomach grumbled from a strict diet of loneliness and frustrated dreams. I could not express myself to my own satisfaction.</p>
<p>In the company’s lodgings for single employees, I cleared out the six tatami mat room allocated to me, crept onto the wide shelf in the closet and shut myself in. But even when I wanted to be in my fantasy world, my co-workers would barge into my room uninvited and I couldn’t pretend I wasn’t home. </p>
<p>I would spread my futon over the shelf in the darkness of the closet, lie down, and secretly listen to the muffled voices outside all day long. German was in vogue in those days, and I clearly remember scrawling “Einsamkeit” (solitude) on the wall of the closet. I was pining away with loneliness. But at the same time, I also took pleasure in being alone. In the darkness of the closet, I could become a phantom lord and rule over the land of dreams.</p>
<p>Nevertheless, a pawn in the service of others cannot continue living like this forever. When I couldn’t stand a job any longer, I would quit. In this way I changed jobs many times. It saddened me to see there wasn’t a single corner of the real world where I could find my niche. And then, at last, the ship of  “the printed word” from my boyhood came sailing in. The opportunity to make a living as a phantom lord opened up before my eyes. It was the only way I could live as I truly wanted.</p>
<p>No doubt there are many fiction writers who view themselves as fighting on behalf of humanity. Then there are those who strive to please their readers, and still others who use their craft to make money. But I can’t help thinking those kinds of reality-based utilitarian thinking are a kind of affectation. With one or two possible exceptions, there isn’t a fiction writer out there who is fit to become the king of an actual (earthbound) castle. It is precisely because they are better suited to rule castles in the air that they pursue this path. Doesn’t this take precedence over practical concerns?</p>
<p>For my part, I never felt the least bit ashamed as a phantom lord for not taking a greater interest in real crime cases.</p>
<p>My Love for the Printed Word </p>
<p>Katsuji to boku to – shōnen no dokusha ni okuru · 1937</p>
<p>My first heady encounter with the printed word was with the #4 type used for Iwaya Sazanami Sanjin’s World Fairy Tales.1 I traded a friend for this thin magazine printed on chrysanthemum paper 2 with an exotic-looking lithograph on its cover. You can only imagine how greedily I devoured this magazine in the parlor of my house and in the elementary school yard. </p>
<p>Prior to this I was, of course, familiar with the typeface used in newspapers. I was still too young to read a newspaper myself, but my mother would read the serialized novels to me. The printed word had a mystique not found anywhere in the real world, a charm which brought forth dreams even more vivid than reality. How I came to yearn for the sweet smell of newspaper ink that tickled my nose! It was a scent I came to associate with the spine-tingling sensation of fear.</p>
<p>Although our elementary school Japanese primer was printed with type, the characters were too big, and they hadn’t used the standard Ming typeface, but some sort of Ching style like an old book from China.3 Whatever the reason, it was different from the kind of printing used for the land of fairy tales and novels. It did not feel dreamlike but oppressive, and I had only a dim impression of it as a printed book at all.</p>
<p>The serial novels in newspapers my mother read aloud to me came from detective stories. When I was a child, my family lived in Nagoya, but we subscribed to the then-popular Osaka Mainichi Shimbun. It was unparalleled for its serialized fiction. One of the more popular was a translation by Kikuchi Yūhō entitled The Secret. There was nothing I enjoyed more than listening to an installment of it every day after I came home from school. I believe I was in my third year of elementary school. Whether it was because children in those days were more innocent, or simply that my grandmother was overly protective, I had not yet been exposed to boys’ magazines.</p>
<p>My mother was also a devoted reader of detective stories by Kuroiwa Ruikō. Under the glow of the parlor lamp, as my grandmother read books about the intrigues of daimyō families, my mother would often sit quietly reading Ruikō. This was before I was old enough to go to school. Meanwhile, my father was preparing for the civil service exam and would stay cooped up in his study every night. After my grandmother and mother finished their needlework, they would while away the long autumn nights reading novels. I would lie still by my mother’s side, waiting until she finished reading for her to tell me the story.</p>
<p>The stories my mother recounted most frequently, however, were from that other favorite of hers, Yūhō’s The Secret. In retrospect, it seems the seed of my fondness for detective novels and ghost stories was planted in those days.  </p>
<p>Since I was already in the third year of elementary school, I was able to remember with great clarity the plot developments in the stories that were read to me each day. Indeed, it was just when my impressions were becoming most vivid that school plays began to be held, and I was chosen to appear on stage. The play chosen for us to perform was none other than The Secret. </p>
<p>On that day I had to wear a black and light gray kimono with rough, vertical stripes, made of Yoneryū or some such material (I forget what color the hakama 4 was). I could not have been more pleased with the pattern of this kimono, and I recall looking at myself in the mirror many times. I experienced a glimmering of adolescent sexuality in my new outfit. I suppose I wanted to be seen by the girls in the class, or at least by one girl in particular. Even for a third grader, the honor – not to mention vanity – of standing before a crowd is intimately connected to the opposite sex. I trust I am not the only person to have felt this way. No doubt many people will remember similar childhood experiences.</p>
<p>My speech did not go especially well. I had anticipated thunderous applause, but the actual outcome was considerably more muted than that, and I felt embarrassed standing there in such an ostentatious kimono. I went home that night rather demoralized. Needless to say, that striped Yoneryū became entangled in more than its fair share of complicated emotions.</p>
<p>It was not much later that a new world of print finally opened up to me through three boys’ magazines: Boy’s World, Boys of Japan, and Youth.5 Today only Boys of Japan remains, but each had its own distinct flavor. Although every issue of Boy’s World included fairy tales written by Sazanami Sanjin, as a whole it had something old-fashioned about it that I couldn’t quite put my finger on. Youth was extremely refined and had an unmistakably literary air, but for all its pretensions, it didn’t quite satisfy my tastes. In the end, the magazine I read most ardently was Boys of Japan. The majority of illustrations in those days were done by Kawabata Ryūshi, which significantly added to its appeal, but more than anything else it was the open, childlike attitude of its gifted journalists that put me at ease. The column for readers’ submissions was lively, and I was always delighted at the boyish spirit with which the magazine staff responded to its readers.   </p>
<p>I submitted a story that was chosen to appear in the magazine, and this further deepened my relationship with it. I remained a devoted reader for a long time. The in-house staff produced much of the content back then, and to this day names such as Takizawa Sosui and Arimoto Hōsui bring back fond memories.</p>
<p>I no longer remember exactly when I switched from boys’ magazines to the likes of Adventure World and World of Bravery.6 At least in the case of Adventure World, I am fairly sure I started reading it before I entered junior high school. Now I was reading adventures and mystery stories by Oshikawa Shunrō. Practically every boy in those days left Sazanami Sanjin behind for Oshikawa Shunrō. There were always tensions between Oshikawa Shunrō and the publishing giant Hakubunkan. It was much later that he abandoned Adventure World and quit the company to start World of Bravery, but I read both magazines with the same feeling of blood-pounding excitement. Ever since then, however, I have probably possessed the sensibilities of a sensationalistic journalist.</p>
<p>In addition to Adventure World, there was Emi Suiin’s World of Exploration. It had the feel of a geographic magazine with its explorations of uncharted lands and journeys to the center of the earth, not to mention Emi’s passion for archaeology. While interesting in its own way, it was a far cry from the freshness and emotional dynamism of Oshikawa Shunrō’s adventure stories. </p>
<p>One of Oshikawa Shunrō’s better-known gothic adventure novels was Phantom of the Iron Tower. The two works with which he debuted, The Submarine Battleship and Brave Japan, have recently been reprinted by Hakubunkan in the magazine New Youth. In my opinion, however, his novel The Mystery of the Tower was especially memorable.</p>
<p>The Mystery of the Tower was another story that I wound up performing in front of others, only this time it took place during the rest hour after lunch in my first year of junior high. I attended Atami Middle School in Nagoya and was in the first graduating class. The teacher who oversaw the freshmen was Mr. Nomura, now Viscount Nomura of the House of Peers. We would eat lunch with him, and then, since he was inordinately fond of stories, he would have us stand up one after the next to perform recitations.</p>
<p>Oshikawa Shunrō was not just a writer of tales of adventure and daring. The King of the Silver Mountain was a detective story worthy of Ruikō, while The Great Detective Hoshina was an adaptation of Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes. There was one more novel of his that I would be remiss not to mention. I believe I read it towards the end of elementary school, but even two or three months after I finished reading, I was loath to tear myself away from its world of sweet dreams. Most likely it was a translation. As best I can remember, it was about a boy hero who holds a skull in a pitch-dark cave and has a wondrously romantic vision of love with a queen. The femininity and mysteries of love it presented completely enchanted me. I think the title was Success on Shanks’ Mare.7 I might have read it at the end of elementary school, or maybe I had already started junior high school; I’m no longer certain. In any case, I also read Kōda Rohan’s Encounter with a Skull around this time and it left a similarly lasting impression. Although the literary value of these two works was completely different, for a long time they were filed away together in my memory as romantic ideals.</p>
<p>My first encounter with Sherlock Holmes, however, was not Oshikawa’s The Great Detective Hoshina. I had read Doyle’s The Golden Pince-nez much earlier in the magazine The Sun.8 Of course this was also when I was still in elementary school, so I was hardly what could be called a full-fledged reader of The Sun. In a corner of my father’s bookshelf on the second floor was a pile of books and magazines with the Hakubunkan journal True Accounts from the Sino-Japanese War on top. Right next to it was a stack of issues of The Sun, my father’s favorite magazine.</p>
<p>Every so often I would go alone into my father’s study, excited at the prospect of seeing things I wasn’t supposed to. I would sometimes browse through The Sun, which published many difficult essays. One day as I was poking around, I discovered the translation of Doyle’s The Golden Pince-nez. Naturally I did not know who Doyle was, nor did I have any idea that his detective stories continued the tradition begun by Poe, but reading him was an incredible experience.</p>
<p>If pressed to say what attracted me to the printed word in my boyhood, I would have to say that it possessed a fantastic quality all its own. It described a place completely unlike the mundane world; an exotic, far-away land of dreams which I deeply longed for. Whenever I looked at print, I discovered a new world. It was truly wonderful. The Sun was quite difficult to read and it would be a stretch to suggest I had a meaningful grasp of Doyle at such an early age, but the encounter had a profound impact on me all the same. A small city in a distant land I never knew existed materialized before my eyes.</p>
<p>In this same study of my father’s, I found an introductory book on astronomy. I learned that the solar system was but a speck of dust occupying a tiny part of the universe, and I trembled at the implications of such things as a “light year.” Even the clouds so far away in the sky were close by comparison. This discovery which I made in my childhood clouded my heart and has colored my view of things ever since.</p>
<p>Another unforgettable book I read around this time was a novel originally by Rider Haggard, translated by Kikuchi Yūhō as The Two Queens. My father was not especially fond of novels, but this one was wedged in amongst the books and magazines in the corner of the bookshelf. It was impossible for my child’s heart to forget that famous writing style; I often saw it in my dreams. Aside from the tremendous shock I received from astronomy, I was deeply affected by the novels I read from the end of elementary school through junior high school, especially Success on a Shank’s Mare (could that really have been the title?), Rider Haggard’s The Two Queens and a translation of Conan Doyle’s The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard. I accidentally stumbled upon this work of Doyle’s somewhat later (a tale of the Napoleonic Wars variously translated in the old days by Kumamoto Kenichirō as A Narrow Scrape, Satō Koroku as An Old General’s Tale, and by Fujino Shōsai as The True History of an Old Hero; I am fairly certain it was Fujino’s version that I read). Despite having already read The Golden Pince-nez, I still had not truly discovered detective stories. In those days, Tayama Katai was rising to prominence in the literary establishment. Since we subscribed to Bungei Club at home, I read Futon and his other works as a matter of course. I was quite familiar with Ruikō, and absorbed myself in reading juicy works of his such as Oh, Heartless, The King in the Cave, and The Ghost Tower. When I think about it now, it is remarkable that in contrast to the great works to which I was exposed, the novels which somehow left the sharpest impression on me were the three by Ruikō, Yūhō, and Oshikawa I mentioned earlier.</p>
<p>My love for the printed word became increasingly stronger. My yearning for the sailing ship of printed words to carry me to the exotic lands of dreams led me to acquire a collection of printing type myself. It was no longer enough just to share in other people’s dreams; I needed to shape my own dreams with my own hands.</p>
<p>I started off like most other children, first playing with gelatin lithographs, and then moved on to a mimeograph, printing odds and ends that imitated the style of my favorite boys’ magazines. I was allowed to put them up for sale in the stationary store in front of the elementary school, and even made a few pennies a copy, but no matter how skillfully I tried to print colors on the mimeograph, it didn’t work out to my satisfaction. Without printing type of my own, I knew I couldn’t cross that bridge to the land of my dreams.</p>
<p>When at last I had saved enough of the allowance my father gave me, I started to buy a collection of type. Together with a good friend of mine from school, or I should say, the first employee of my new printing company, I ran a considerable distance to what was then probably the only modern print shop in Nagoya. I wonder how many times I visited that shop, my chest pounding every time.</p>
<p>I accumulated several thousand pieces of #4 type. Not yet stained with ink, their silver color was beautiful to behold. I would play with them one by one like little soldiers made of lead, then carefully put them back them in their handmade cases. The secret to reaching the land of dreams was hidden away in those rows of little lead bricks. They were silver clappers9 that held the key to the world of fantasy.</p>
<p>My next move was to get hold of a hand-powered press, roller, newspaper ink, composing cases, line spacing, line rules, and tweezers. Just like that I could become the storywriter, the editor, the layout manager, the typesetter, the printer, and the binder.</p>
<p>In another wing of my house connected by a glass door was a four-and-a-half tatami room that served as my study room. This became both my editing room and print shop. My friends would come over and we would convene a meeting of the editorial board. Straight away each person was assigned a job, and the ink started rolling. My staff included Nakagawa Zennosuke, now a professor at Tōhoku University. Nakagawa was a talented and handsome boy a bit younger than me, and he played the harmonica brilliantly. I can still see him standing in the yard in front of my house where we used to gather to play, dazzling the rest of us with his solo performances. </p>
<p>One of the boys rolled the glossy ink over the silvery type, while another carefully laid out the paper. I would carefully grasp the handle of the printing press and firmly apply the press to the paper. It was great fun to slowly peel away the paper and examine the results. There was nothing unusual about printing letters on paper, but for me it was like a kind of miracle. Suddenly my simple words glowed lustrously, looking almost embarrassingly like some kind of literary masterpiece.</p>
<p>In this way I began a relationship with printing type itself. It was a secret pact between us that has continued throughout my life. The deep feelings I have for the printed word remain with me to this day.</p>
<p>— ❈ —</p>
<p>The year I graduated from junior high school in Nagoya my father’s imported machinery shop went bankrupt and I was unable to take the entrance exam for high school. I accompanied my father once in his new efforts at a reclamation project in colonial Korea, but what I wanted above all was to go back to school. It isn’t a pretty story, but at the time I was driven by a political ambition in the vein of World of Bravery. In order to continue my studies of politics and put myself through school in the manner espoused by World of Bravery, I returned alone to the homeland. I headed to Tokyo and obtained work as an assistant at a small print shop in front of Yushima Tenjin.10 I also began to attend preparatory courses at Waseda University. Of course I was determined to become a politician.</p>
<p>But for the time being I was back to the printed word. By day I went to school, but after dark I worked the night shift until midnight or 1:00 a.m. Layout and typesetting are not easy work for an amateur, so I was mostly assigned to printing work, like operating the “hand hood”, 11 and inking the rollers, until my entire face was smeared black. The type cases in this shop were infested with Nanking bugs 12 and my body was constantly covered with red swellings where they bit me. Since the owner was a bachelor, I took turns making dinner with one of the other employees. We had to cook the rice mixed with an equal proportion of barley. The lunchboxes I packed for school consisted entirely of this meager blackened fare and some pickled radishes, but my love of the printed word gave me the resolve to hold out for as long as I could.</p>
<p>I pleaded with the owner of the shop to let me put out a magazine. The print jobs were a piece of cake and it wasn’t a particularly busy shop, so creating a magazine in my spare time would have been relatively easy. I was serious about it and did my best to convince the owner, but he wouldn’t hear of it. I suppose this was the decisive factor that led me to look for different work.</p>
<p>After I left the print shop, I shared a four-and-a-half tatami room above a geta sandal shop in the Kasugachō area with three other indigent students and cooked all of my own meals. Still, I never abandoned the goal of publishing a magazine. I decided I would create a children’s entertainment magazine based on my own tastes, and set aside the profits for my college tuition. An acquaintance provided me with an initial outlay of money. I put together a pamphlet advertising my magazine, and since I was able to draw a bit, so I did the cover art and made up the plates myself. Naturally I intended to write all of the stories and draw all the illustrations. But midway through, just as the first issue was taking shape, the money dried up and there was no one else I could turn to for additional funds. In short, the result was the same as if I hadn’t lifted a finger in the first place.</p>
<p>About a year later, I was able to find a part-time job as a magazine editor for Mr. Kawasaki Katsu. Now he is a representative for the Minsei, but in those days Mr. Kawasaki was in charge of organizing lobbyists for the Kenseikai, and he ran a locally financed magazine.13 I got a position on the editorial staff of this magazine through the introduction of another friend. Once again I was working with print. The smell of the ink made me happy.</p>
<p>My passion for the printed word impressed Mr. Kawasaki and I went from editing to writing for the organization and drawing the magazine’s covers. I frequently visited the printers and got to be on good terms with the manager. Over the din of machinery I had to proofread and make corrections in the typesetting, but it was a lot of fun.</p>
<p>The magazine didn’t meet its expenses and ceased publication after the third or fourth issue. Still, I got to know Mr. Kawasaki, who has subsequently helped me out on numerous occasions. One of the senior editors with whom I worked side by side was Hasegawa Kotarō, formerly of the Kokumin Shimbun. Another person on the editorial board was Shitamura Umatarō, who rose to infamy by plotting to assassinate Count Ōkuma Shigenobu.</p>
<p>As I mentioned before, I entered school with the hope of becoming a politician and assisted in editing a political magazine, but by the time I finished preparatory courses to enter the university (in those days at Waseda University there was a two-year preparatory course in what is now the Waseda Academy), my interest in politics was much diminished. Part of the reason was that during this period I made my first visit to hear the proceedings of the Diet. Unfortunately, on the day I went, there was some kind of uproar amongst members of the Diet that looked just like children fighting. I came away thinking politics was foolish. The arguments bandied about were nothing to speak of either. It was all emotion and violence. On the other hand, my readiness to disregard politics as a whole because of this experience makes me wonder now if I wasn’t the bigger fool. In any case, it was obvious I wasn’t cut out to be a politician.</p>
<p>Political science at Waseda belonged to the department of politics and economics, and students were able to select courses from a variety of subjects. Somewhere along the way, I found myself drawn to economics. In economics, particularly in theories of self-interest and value, the object of study was humanity itself, which I found suited me very well. The connections of economics to sociology and social psychology were also enticing. In the end, I graduated from school having only studied theoretical disciplines that did not concern themselves with real life. My classmates included Nakano Tomio, who is now a professor at Waseda, and the economist Idei Moriyuki. Another was Nagakawa Toshimi of the Tokyo Asahi.</p>
<p>When I left school I was hired by a trading company in Osaka, thanks to Mr. Kawasaki, but I quit about a year later in order to work as a clerk for Suzuki Shipbuilders in Toba Port, Mie Prefecture. There I became friends with the late Masumoto Uhei (chosen as the First Representative for the International Workers Association). Yet again I was reunited with the printed word.</p>
<p>Under Mr. Masumoto’s direction, I edited a magazine with a readership of two or three thousand factory workers. I barely did anything as a clerk, preferring instead to devote my time to the magazine. It was an hour by train from Toba to the printing presses at the Ise Newspaper Company in Tsu, but since I was allowed to deduct travel expenses from the budget and stay overnight in Tsu, I greatly enjoyed those short trips.</p>
<p>I also enjoyed the atmosphere of the newspaper company. It was fun writing manuscripts and editing with the sound of the rotary press in the background. Among my colleagues at the time who are now in the world of journalism was Motoida Junichi, the editor-in-chief of The Journal of Books. He was just a young man in those days, confident and headstrong, but he was also amiable and had a knack for business. On top of that, he had a healthy interest in learning. You could tell he was a young man who was going places.</p>
<p>It was around this time that I started to understand a bit about literature. In college I read up on the use of secret codes in the West and loved detective stories by Poe and Doyle. Similarly, I was fond of the novels from my childhood by Izumi Kyōka and Hirotsu Ryūrō, but paid little attention to novels in vogue with the then-current literary establishment. But when I encountered the works of Tanizaki Junichirō for the first time I was filled with admiration, and just before I arrived in Toba I read Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment and The Brothers Karamazov. I felt my world change while working in Toba. I must have been about twenty-three or twenty-four years old.</p>
<p>I remained in Toba for approximately a year, then left the company and quit the magazine. I returned to Tokyo and opened “Three Men’s Books,” a used bookstore in the Dangozaka neighborhood of Hongō with my two younger brothers. But before I knew it, I was neglecting business. Along with friends, including the son of Ishikawa Sanshirō, I helped found a fan club for then-popular opera singer Taya Rikizō. I missed publishing, so I set myself to work on a catchpenny opera magazine, and consequently failed to pay the rent. I had no choice but to do a bit of moonlighting to pay the bills. Receiving the publishing rights from Kitazawa Rakuten, I began editing the Tokyo Puck under the management of a man named Shimota. I wrote everything myself and even did some drawings, including amateurish political cartoons I signed with my own name. This earned the indignation of my fellow cartoonists, and after the second issue, having edited pretty well as I pleased, I was tossed out the door. Journalists for Tokyo Puck such as the late Ogawa Jihei, Okamoto Ippei, Shimokawa Hekoten, and Maekawa Senpo would visit on occasion. The late Yoshioka Chōhei was another journalist with whom I came be on good terms.</p>
<p>A year after opening the used bookstore, I packed my things and moved back to Osaka. I was hired as a regular contributor to the Osaka Jiji Shimpō newspaper. One of my colleagues was Okada Buhei. Kishi Yamaji was also there, but he left the company about three months after I signed on, and I never met him.</p>
<p>I quit the Jiji Shimpō when I was offered a job in Tokyo by The Laborers’ Club. I believe The Laborers’ Club still exists today as a workers’ group, but back then it was organized by some young engineers as a cooperative social group for labor and capital. One of the organizers was Haruta Toshitame, who worked for Koga Saburō. Although we never imagined we shared a common interest in detective novels, we were well acquainted with one another. </p>
<p>Officially my position was secretary-general, but what I enjoyed most was editing the magazine The Laborer. I was back to the printed word once more. I finished school at twenty-three, and I wrote my first detective story “The Two-Sen Copper Coin” in the summer of my twenty-ninth year. Not including the attempts to put out a magazine of my own while still in college, I worked on the shipbuilding company’s journal, Tokyo Puck, Osaka Jiji Shimpō, and The Laborer. I went from one job to another like any other worker, but amazingly enough, my connection to printing never died.</p>
<p>And so, at last having become a fiction writer, I am effectively wedded to the printed word. Still, looking back to the purer emotions of my boyhood, I somehow feel I devolved into a vulgar journalist. I can’t hide behind the excuse that I needed to do whatever it took to make a living. Poverty gave me a marginal degree of business acumen and I learned to make compromises with an ever-changing world. After becoming a writer, I couldn’t hold on to that earlier pure sentiment. For better or worse, the way I got my start as a writer was no different than most of the popular fiction writers out there today – there was nothing pure about it.</p>
<p>There are two personalities that live inside everyone’s heart, and for me they are quite separate. One is the eternal boy, always pure, the idealist content to chase after far-away dreams. He is the one who loves how the magic of printing creates a beautiful bridge to the land of fantasy. The other was educated in the school of hard knocks, and became good at business and socializing. This one may be a weakling who lowers himself in this world for utilitarian reasons, but he too feels incomplete without the romance of the printed word and tries to connect his life to it.</p>
<p>Confessions of Rampo</p>
<p>Rampo uchiake banashi · 1927</p>
<p>I sometimes wonder if it wasn’t a big mistake that I came to be a writer in the first place. I’m not an especially gifted stylist and I’m not especially well read, so the most I can say is that I have an amateur’s passion. Originally, my specialty was economics. I would be deeply offended if someone suggested I’d be better off working in that field, but it is in fact what I studied in school. As for what led me down this unusual path, well, it was a kind of disease. I don’t know whether it was because I had too many interests or that I was temperamentally disinclined to see things through to their conclusion, but it somehow seemed to me like a mental illness. When I left school I was initially determined to make lots of money, so I went to Osaka, the hometown of entrepreneurs, and worked as a clerk in a trading company. In short, I tried to put to use what I learned at school in economics.</p>
<p>I had a pretty good head for business. We were involved in the South Seas trade after the Great War, and it was a fairly bold enterprise. We’d set up a sailing ship, pack it to the brim with sundries and daily necessities, and help bring it to market with the natives. I managed to make a tidy sum of money. If I had kept at it, I wouldn’t be squeaking by as I am today, but since there’s nothing I can do about it now, there’s no point in regret.</p>
<p>There are several reasons why I gave up on working for that company. For starters, I was a poor apprentice who came into a pile of money and, well, it might be overstating matters, but the devil got into me. I played around a bit. It’s embarrassing to admit, but until then I had never been with a woman. I must have been about twenty-three years old. I acted like I had, but it wasn’t true. When I was seventeen or eighteen and still in school, I talked a friend into going with me to a kind of brothel called an aimaiya1 and looked around wide-eyed, but oddly enough I preserved my chastity. It’s not that I have anything to be proud about. The truth of the matter is not that I was well behaved, but that I was ashamed. What I really mean to say is I was scared.</p>
<p>Incidentally, while I am digressing from one subject to the next, my first love was at the age of fifteen. Of course I had glimmerings of a sort when I was seven or eight, but in terms of really being conscious of it, what you could honestly call my first love came when I was fifteen (by the old count).2 It happened in my second year of high school. Don’t get me wrong, I’m not bragging. After all, the object of my affection wasn’t a girl. Well, I guess it amounts to the same thing. Certainly that sort of homosexual play is common enough. It was platonic and ardent, and I don’t half wonder if my feelings of love to last a lifetime weren’t exhausted on someone of the same sex. It’s actually just a sweet, tender story.</p>
<p>Now that I am past the age of thirty (thirty-three to be exact), I feel embarrassed baring my soul in front of others, but back when I was a youth of fifteen, these affairs seemed very romantic. My high school was in Nagoya, but it was hardly developed as it is today. The school was a hastily erected barracks, little better than a pigpen. Locally renowned radishes were planted in the schoolyard. It was our duty after school to pick them and level the fields. Those of us who came to school from the city had to walk a quarter of a mile beside an irrigation ditch through the fields. On days when it rained, we could barely trudge through the mud. Along the way was a shrine surrounded by a grove of trees. In the evenings, the village babysitters would gather there wearing their distinctive headbands and carrying snot-nosed babies on their backs. When they caught sight of me, they would cry out “good boy, good boy” (meaning a good-looking boy), and tease me. It was intimidating enough to walk alone, but if a friend came along it was unbearably humiliating and I would turn red as the setting sun. My friends and classmates (we were the first graduating class, so there were no upper classmen) thought it was funny. In the classroom, too, they would poke fun at me by calling me a “good boy.” It still makes me wince to recall that miserable feeling.</p>
<p>An old-fashioned machismo was in vogue in those days. It was extremely hypocritical and full of bluster. Effeminate behavior was taboo. Starting with the teachers, the word “wimp” was often bandied about, and this became the ultimate insult. As I’m sure you can imagine today, to be dubbed a “good boy” was just as bad as being a “wimp.” This, too, made me very uncomfortable.</p>
<p>In my own class I was the youngest, the smallest and the weakest. Since I was labeled a “good boy,” I came by the role of a milksop.3 Quite a few of them made passes at me. I blushed like a girl of eighteen, pretended not to understand and fled from each encounter. This sort of situation was very common at school, and there were plenty of others who also had to fag. So-and-so is with so-and-so. You could wind up with a bad reputation. But there weren’t that many dirty relationships. I came close to doing some dangerous things, but never actually went through with it. Mainly the relationships were platonic.</p>
<p>Love letters were much in vogue. We would send sentimental, florid letters. I received my fair share, but for the most part I never replied. There was just one I received which I couldn’t refuse. I got to work on my reply right after I got it. When I think of it now, I’m sure he was also a good boy. He was clever and skilled at drawing and kendo. If he were the girl in a play, you’d fall in love with him at first sight. But he also had a friend who was an upper classman at a different school who was a notoriously tough delinquent. The brute approached me one day in the corner of a desolate open field, and warned me I better do whatever this classmate of mine said. I was shaking in my boots. I could only nod my head in mute agreement. As a parting shot, he told me that if I defied his friend, he wouldn’t let me alone. Then he flexed his bony arm at me.</p>
<p>Still, the boy in my class who sent the letter didn’t seem altogether bad, and I got to work right away writing my reply. I gave him an enticing response. We often exchanged love letters after that. It wasn’t long before summer vacation came and the teacher took us to the Chita Peninsula to swim in the ocean. Everyone who wanted to go swimming came along. We stayed at a Buddhist temple, and for two or three weeks strengthened our bodies.</p>
<p>No sooner did we arrive, however, than I caught a cold. It wasn’t serious, but I wasn’t able to swim. There was nothing for me to do but eat, read books and wander around the cool grounds of the temple. A good friend had brought along a go board, and we played go, too. The sea was close enough for the smell of brine to seep into the room. The tatami mats were reddish brown, but the eaves overhead were deep, and you could clearly see the garden, glowing white in the sun. The pond, the stone lantern, the sound of cicadas – I remember it like it was yesterday.</p>
<p>At night we set up mosquito nets, four or five of us sleeping in each one. We made a tremendous racket every time we crawled under the nets. But there was a boy among us planning to join the army who played the bugle well, and he played lights out in the most melancholy tones. That was the signal for us to stop our roughhousing. Then everyone switched to talking in whispers. We probably planned it, but the boy I fancied and I wound up sleeping under the same mosquito net. The others didn’t bother us, so we were able to lie side-by-side. I didn’t find anything particularly unsettling about it. I made up my mind for myself. I was a strange child, and I already had a dim sense of pleasure in being persecuted. The problem, though, was that even though the other boy was hardly of an age not to know what was going on, he became awfully uptight. Each night passed without anything happening. It was very dissatisfying. Then, to make matters worse, he took it into his head for some reason to make the dramatic gesture of bringing a knife into the mosquito net and brandishing it at me. I don’t know why he did it. Maybe he didn’t understand my feelings. To this day I can’t figure out what his intentions were. But that was as far as it went, there was no physical relationship of any sort. Thereafter as well.</p>
<p>Despite the fact that nothing happened between us, rumors about us spread, and it reached the teacher’s ears that a knife had been drawn. There was a big fuss over it. I was called into a small side room upstairs from the main hall of the temple where two of the teachers were waiting. One was a young man who had just graduated from school himself. For a teacher, he was oddly reserved.</p>
<p>“Were you sleeping in the same mosquito net as so-and-so? Did he threaten you? Did anything happen in the middle of the night?”</p>
<p>He looked as though it pained him to ask. I flushed bright red and despondently shook my head no. But there were witnesses to the fact that a knife had been drawn, so I was treated with suspicion and the teachers sent a confidential letter by express mail to my father. Several people were assigned to keep watch over me. The same went for the other boy. Naturally we slept in separate mosquito nets.</p>
<p>Apparently the other boy was mercilessly reprimanded. However, he was not expelled. I wasn’t exactly yelled at, but my classmates watched me until I got home. For a long time afterwards not only my teachers, but my classmates, too, looked at me strangely. Well, I was someone to keep an eye on. But I never felt anything like embarrassment or the urge to hide. I had already been crushed by a sense of humiliation worse than death.</p>
<p>This experience left the most lasting impression of my days as a milksop. It certainly took me down a notch, but it was not in fact the incident I previously referred to as my first love. In the same class, there was another student around the same age and height as myself who was well known as a handsome boy. He, too, had a delinquent friend from another school that sometimes gave me a hard time, but what brought us together was the way in which we got along without either of us having to say a word. It was completely platonic. Whenever we looked at each other, we both became bashful and frequently couldn’t speak. I think we were both fifteen at the time, by the old count. Instead of talking, we wrote lots of love letters. What we wrote was rather dirty. Some of the lines were quite memorable, like saying, “I want to eat you,” and so forth. It wasn’t just on the surface: this is how I thought of platonic love. Neither of us was the milksop; it was an equal relationship, like male and female lovers. Since we never consummated the relationship, we could carry on in this fashion.</p>
<p>At the time I was like a shy girl in love, and all I could do was think about him day and night. When it eventually became known that I was smitten with a classmate, I was teased in various ways. I experienced a kind of thrill when I was teased. On the outside I blushed, but inside I felt pure bliss. When I met with him, I became stiff and couldn’t open my mouth to speak a single word. If we walked along and our bodies merely brushed against each other, my nerves reacted with a jolt. I would get feverishly hot and my body quivered whenever we held hands. Of course I wanted to hold his hand. But even more than me squeezing his hand, I wanted him to squeeze mine.	 </p>
<p>I remember vividly how we met at the home of a mutual friend, and to my delight we secretly held hands in front of him. There was a knothole in his desk that I poked my finger through from above. The other boy secretly took my finger in his hand from below. Never since have I had a similar feeling, even from a woman. All the same, the most we ever did was hold hands. We never even kissed. Platonic love of this kind is quite rare, isn’t it?</p>
<p>Sadly, if love with the opposite sex is short, love with the same sex is downright fleeting. After three or four years in the same class, light whiskers began to grow around the other boy’s mouth, while pimples started to appear on my rosy cheeks. I’m sure another reason must have come up beforehand which I’ve forgotten, but we gradually drifted apart. Not long thereafter, he became ill and passed away. His brief life was cut short without ever finishing school.</p>
<p>Consequently, the romances I had in my boyhood brought little in the way of sexual contact. Moreover, I felt as though I had exhausted myself with the same sex. If this view isn’t correct, then I don’t know how to explain my feelings: those of a person who knew nothing of love. Of course I wasn’t insensitive to the attractions of women, and experienced a love beyond surface appearance more than once. But somehow, it never seemed like the real thing. Maybe it was because of the sexual connection, but one way or another my love for women always seemed impure, and therefore not an instance of true love.</p>
<p>But to return to where I began, the reason I started fooling around with the money I earned at the trading company had to do with physical knowledge of the opposite sex, what you might call unclean relationships. I started to hum along to ditties and love songs that would have made me nauseous to hear in my platonic days. I lost my distaste for popular dancing, too. It seemed to me that platonic feelings were utterly incompatible with the life I wanted to lead. Instead, I came to prefer the suggestive rhythms of the samisen and taiko drum. By the same token, all indication of platonic sentiment vanished from my debonair, polished features. They were replaced by sentiments typical of any adult, ordinary human, or if you prefer, animal. I had a sense that all the affairs of my boyhood were somehow behind me.</p>
<p>As usual I’ve wandered from one thing to another, and filled up quite a few pages without saying much at all about what I was supposed to. My original point was to talk about how after graduating from school my first job, at a trading company, ended in failure. From there I worked as a factory clerk, owned a used bookstore, and became a reporter for an economics magazine. Then I became the editor of Tokyo Puck, did a stint at a Chinese noodle shop, worked as a newspaper reporter, a lawyer’s aide, and a labor movement’s secretary. I also worked as a bureaucrat in city hall, joined a cosmetics manufacturer, and became an adman for the Mainichi Shimbun newspaper. I never stayed at any of these jobs for more than six months or a year. Looking back to my university days, I could go on about how I toiled to no avail in a bug-infested print shop, lived a life of privation as a clerk, became a hanger-on to a member of the Diet, an English tutor to a stockbroker, even how I worked so diligently at a public library, and so on. I shouldn’t forget to include the miseries of a detective writer if I’m going to tell my life story, but there isn’t any room left in this magazine.4  You are surely weary by now – to be honest, even I am sick of talking about myself – so for the time being, I will lay my pen down here. If the mood takes me to write more, I’ll ask them to let me do a follow-up in next month’s issue, or some other time.</p>
<p>Fingerprint Novels of the Meiji Era</p>
<p>Meiji no shimon shōsetsu · 1951</p>
<p> </p>
<p>In the September 1950 issue of EQMM,1 “Queen’s Quorum” was devoted to the earliest use of fingerprints in the detective novel. “Queen’s Quorum” is a chronological record, with short critical commentaries, of representative works drawn from anthologies of short stories from Poe to the present. Queen has selected just over a hundred authors covering every year from Poe’s Tales (1845) until today, which he calls his “quorum.” Published in the back of Ellery Queen’s Twentieth Century Detective Stories in 1948, this “quorum” was reprinted and serialized in a revised and expanded version in EQMM starting midway through last year. </p>
<p>This checklist was further revised, and in 1951 it came out in a gorgeous edition on high-quality paper by Little, Brown and Company. It also came with a mouthful of a title – Queen’s Quorum: A History of the Detective-Crime Short Story as Revealed by the 106 Most Important Books Published in this Field Since 1845.   I am introduced in slightly under one page. The text reads: </p>
<p>In 1925 Edogawa Rampo (pseudonym of Taro Hirai), dean of Japanese detective-story writers, published his first book – THE PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST AND OTHER STORIES (Tokyo: Shunyo-Do, 1925), about detective Kogoro Akechi. Although one of the least prolific of contemporary mystery writers in Japan, Rampo has already produced more than thirty full-length books, containing novels, novelettes, and short stories, and a half a dozen volumes of detective-story criticism. Other representative titles among his short-story collections are FRUITS OF POMEGRANATE (Tokyo: Ryukoo Shoin, 1935) and MYSTERY AND IMAGINATION (Tokyo: Hanga-Soo [sic], 1937). If you say the name Edogawa Rampo aloud, and keep repeating it, the name will seem to grow more and more familiar: and it should, because it is a verbal translation of the Japanese pronunciation of Edgar Allen Poe.” 2 </p>
<p>In any case, proceeding in the order given by EQMM, Herbert Cadett’s The Adventures of a Journalist (London: Sands, 1900) numbers twenty-eighth in line from Poe’s Tales. According to Queen’s critical commentary:</p>
<p>Beverley Gretton, the detective in this book, has never been referred to even in a footnote by any of the critics of the mystery story... Also, in “The Clue of the Finger-Prints,” the opening tale of Cadett’s book, Gretton makes use of “identification by fingerprints” – anticipating, again by seven years, the accepted first use in R. Austin Freeman’s novel, The Red Thumb-Mark. Even most experts seem to have forgotten that Mark Twain deserves credit for the authentic first use of identification by fingerprints both in the short story and the novel: first, in 1883, in Chapter XXXI of Life on the Mississippi (Boston: James R. Osgood) – the chapter is a complete short story by itself; and later, in 1894, as the main plot device of his novel, The Tragedy of Pudd’nhead Wilson (Hartford: American Publishing Company).3 </p>
<p>While this suggests that the world’s first detective novels involving fingerprints were these works by Twain, there was in fact such a detective novel in Japan which came out after Life on the Mississippi but before Pudd’nhead Wilson. In a strict sense, it is not the fingerprint that is analyzed in the story, but the entire flat of the hand. By this I don’t mean the sort of palm-reading done by fortune tellers, but rather that the central theme concerns how the culprit’s identity is deduced from the imprinted patterns of five fingers and the open hand.</p>
<p>The work in question is The Magic Lantern, a shorthand transcription of an oral performance by the naturalized Englishman and professional kōdan and rakugo storyteller Kairakutei Black.4  It was published as a novel in 1892 (Meiji 25), two years before Pudd’nhead Wilson. Forensic fingerprinting in Japan went into effect in 1908, so I find it quite remarkable that a detective novel in which the culprit is identified by fingerprints and a handprint was published sixteen years earlier.</p>
<p> Before I go into the details of The Magic Lantern, we might take a moment to consider the history of forensic fingerprinting prior to its official implementation. There are several reference works on the subject, but I have made a simple chronological table based on Dr. Furuhata’s “The Science of Fingerprints” in The Encyclopedia of Criminology, vol. 12 (Bukyōsha, 1931)5 and the Encyclopedia Americana’s entry on fingerprints (the most recent edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica was not sufficiently detailed). In order to compare the dates for forensic fingerprinting and the publication of fingerprint novels, I have included in this chronology the earliest detective novels involving fingerprints of which I am aware. They are marked with an asterisk.</p>
<p>1686	In Italy, Bolognese professor of medicine Marcello Malpighi published his anatomical study of fingerprints.</p>
<p>1823 	In Germany, Breslau University professor J.E. Purkinje published a classification of fingerprints, also from an anatomical standpoint. </p>
<p>1880	While working at the Tsukiji Hospital in Tokyo, Japan, the Englishman Dr. Henry Faulds published a research paper in the October 28, 1880 issue of the English journal Nature which recommended the use of fingerprints for identification purposes. Faulds was the first person to argue for this application. </p>
<p>1880 	While employed in the civilian administration of the Indian state of Bengal, the Englishman Sir William James Herschel used fingerprints to prevent document fraud, identify prisoners, and other uses. Based on these experiences, he published his findings in the November 25, 1880 issue of Nature.  He was beaten to the punch by Faulds by just one month. </p>
<p>Soon thereafter English geneticist Sir Francis Galton (Darwin’s cousin) scientifically proved that no two people have the same fingerprints, nor do fingerprints change over a lifetime. He went on to publish his own classification system.6</p>
<p>1883*	Mark Twain, Life on the Mississippi.</p>
<p>1892*	Kairakutei Black, The Magic Lantern.</p>
<p>1894*	Mark Twain, Pudd’nhead Wilson.</p>
<p>1900*	Herbert Cadett, The Adventures of a Journalist.</p>
<p>Stimulated by Galton’s earlier research, a commission was formed on the use of forensic fingerprinting. Sir Edward Richard Henry, the Inspector-General of Police in Bengal, India who became Commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police, was a leading committee member.7</p>
<p>1901	The aforementioned committee adopted Sir Henry’s proposal for the “Henry Method of Fingerprint Classification” and it was put into effect in England and Wales. Today the majority of countries around the world use this system. </p>
<p>1903	In the United States the first use of fingerprints was by Gilbert Thomson in New Mexico in 1882 to prevent forgery, but in official terms the earliest application was in 1903 at Sing Sing Prison, where a fingerprint book of all prisoners was created. Some years later the Henry classificatory system was adopted in the United States, and today the FBI maintains a casebook which, counting members of the armed services, contains the fingerprints of 650,000 individuals, making it the largest such collection in the world. </p>
<p>Some time after the Henry system in England came the Roscher system in Germany (also known as the Hamburg system) established by Dr. Roscher, the chief of police in Hamburg. The German-speaking countries use this system.</p>
<p>In similar fashion, Argentinean fingerprint scientist Juan Vucetich (whose work I am unable to read) came up with another original classification system which is now used in Spanish-speaking countries.</p>
<p>1905*	Arthur Conan Doyle, The Return of Sherlock Holmes. (I will explain its significance below).</p>
<p>1907*	R. Austin Freeman, “The Red Thumb-mark.”</p>
<p>1908	In Japan the Ministry of Justice established an investigative committee for criminal identification and on July 24 of the same year it was decided that the Roscher system would be adopted. It went into effect the following year.  </p>
<p>1912	The first bureau of fingerprinting was established in the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department. </p>
<p>From this list let me begin by discussing two stories in Doyle’s 1905 collection The Return of Sherlock Holmes. The first is “The Adventure of the Norwood Builder,” which describes an innocent man who becomes a suspect when a false fingerprint is pressed against a wall.  It is done by making an impression of a man’s thumbprint from a wax seal, which is then stained with blood and pressed against the wall. It’s a very simple affair. I should also note that in this story the term used is not the now-ubiquitous “fingerprint,” but rather the term “thumb-mark.”</p>
<p> The second story is “The Adventure of the Abbey Grange.” While three glasses are found at the crime scene, leaving the impression that three men had been drinking, Holmes deduces that in fact there were only two men. However, even though the ideal device of the glasses factors into his deduction, he completely ignores their fingerprints, suggesting that Holmes knows nothing about fingerprint identification.8 </p>
<p>I don’t know the dates when these stories were carried in magazines,9 but in any event for a book published in 1905 it comes across as betraying a lack of knowledge about fingerprints. Two years later in Freeman’s “The Red Thumb-mark” there is a scientific description of falsified fingerprints as we might expect, but since it was only around this time that Scotland Yard’s fingerprint bureau finally came into its own, this leads me to wonder whether their value had become widely recognized.   </p>
<p>Although Cadett’s story introduced by Queen, “The Clue of the Finger-prints,” is not much worth reading, it deserves special mention for the clarity of its title. In the Japanese translation of Mark Twain’s still earlier work, Pudd’nhead Wilson, the word “finger-prints” is used, but since I did not own the original, I contacted the translator, Mr. Sasaki Kuni, to inquire about it. He had lost his own copy of the book, so he did me the favor of writing a letter to an elderly gentleman and Twain expert living in Kobe, Mr. Nishikawa Tamanosuke (then eighty-seven years old). He received a detailed reply from Mr. Nishikawa, which assured us that the word “finger-prints” was indeed used in Pudd’nhead Wilson.</p>
<p>Pudd’nhead Wilson tells the story of an eccentric character named Wilson who enjoys collecting the fingerprints of people in the neighborhood by pressing them onto glass plates: this at a time when the ability of fingerprints to single out individuals was virtually unknown. Although he did not have any calculated purpose in mind, what was entertaining for the oddball Wilson becomes a clue to discovering the perpetrator of a crime. It was a highly imaginative idea in an age when few could even envision forensic fingerprinting. Moreover, as Pudd’nhead Wilson was clearly designed as a detective novel, the history of detective stories must not forget Twain’s contributions in this work. </p>
<p>Turning to Japan, not only was The Magic Lantern published in Tokyo two years before Pudd’nhead Wilson, but the fact that the earliest claims for forensic fingerprinting were made by an Englishman residing in Japan suggests an equally intriguing connection. As my list indicates, the world’s first advocate of fingerprinting for personal identification was Dr. Henry Faulds, who was working at the time at the Tsukiji Hospital in Tokyo. Dr. Furuhata’s entry on “Fingerprinting” describes him as follows:</p>
<p>The circumstances which led up to the discovery of forensic fingerprinting as it is practiced in Japan today began in 1878 when Henry Faulds, an English physician at the Tsukiji Hospital in Tokyo, noticed traces of fingerprints preserved in Stone Age clay pottery unearthed around this time in Japan. He was also fascinated by the practice in Japan since antiquity of using a thumbprint or palm-print to seal a document.10  The result of his research was a proposal for the application of fingerprints for personal identification, which he submitted to the English scientific journal Nature. It was published in the October 1880 issue.</p>
<p>(In this passage it may appear as though Faulds was only in Japan for a brief time in the late 1870s, but according to Mr. Nishina’s comments in the Heibonsha Encyclopedia’s entry “fingerprints,” Faulds in fact lived in Japan from 1875 until 1887.) </p>
<p>This at last brings us back to Kairakutei Black’s Magic Lantern, whose plot I will attempt to briefly summarize here. A bank president, who single-handedly owns and operates London’s Iwade Bank (similar to Kuroiwa Ruikō’s adaptations, English names have been converted into Japanese names),11 one day unexpectedly encounters a beggar boy on the street whose honesty profoundly moves him.  He takes the boy in, enrolls him in school and later hires him as an employee at the bank. This young man is gifted with intelligence, good looks and sincerity, and great things are expected of him. </p>
<p>The president of the Iwade Bank has a daughter of marriageable age who is in love with this young employee, and he, too, wishes to marry her. The president is aware of this, but he is loath to give his daughter to a former beggar and remonstrates with the young man. Still the young man shows no signs of relinquishing his love, and in the end he is fired. Several days later the bank president is found murdered in his office. Naturally suspicion falls upon the young man who was fired and who is suspected of harboring a grudge. He is arrested just as he is about to board a ship in the Liverpool harbor and thrown into prison.</p>
<p>The bank president’s younger brother, who is a lawyer, makes his entrance, determined to learn the truth behind the crime. He is also a renowned amateur detective. A sheet of white paper unmistakably stained with the murderer’s bloody handprint was left on a table at the crime scene. This is the only evidence, but because this was a time before forensic identification was commonly practiced, the police do nothing at all to investigate.  However, the victim’s younger brother knows that fingerprints are a means of individual identification. I will quote this portion of the original text. I have glossed some of the more difficult phrases, but otherwise made no changes. </p>
<p>A police detective shows the lawyer the paper with the bloody handprint, whereupon the lawyer says: “Perhaps this won’t seem like evidence to you, but in my opinion it is without a doubt the most important evidence we’ve got. We know the criminal with this.12 Four or five years ago when I traveled around the world I briefly stayed in China and Japan. Unlike England, in both countries for documents to made official they must bear a seal imprinted with one’s name carved into boxwood or precious metals. The seal is imprinted below one’s name, but sometimes one simply produces a thumbprint in ink instead. This is called a thumbprint seal, and usually even when the official seal is used for extra security – in other words, when research has been done to produce evidence – the thumbprint accompanies it. In China when a man becomes a soldier his entire hand is dipped in ink and pressed onto his conscription papers. Should the man flee from duty, this handprint can be used to determine his whereabouts. But how could such a strange thing work, if there’s no proof whose handprint it was!  Even if a soldier’s handprint was recorded on his papers how could this help locate him if he deserted? The reason, I gradually learned, is that this was a longstanding custom since olden times. The lines on the human hand and the patterns on our skin13 are different for each person. If you gather a hundred people, or a thousand, and compare their hands, no two are alike. As a result, the handprint, which cannot be faked or altered, is vastly superior to an official seal. Occasionally this handprint is made in blood with the lines of the hand and the patterns on the skin clearly visible. If this is presented as evidence to find the criminal, I am certain we will quickly learn his identity.” </p>
<p>He convinces the police to take handprints on paper of the bank president’s family and all of the employees in order to compare them with the bloody handprint. Because a magic lantern can magnify and project objects better than what can be seen with the naked eye, two magic lantern devices are set up and an experiment is conducted before the assembled police and other concerned parties. Although the story refers to real devices, this was at a time when magic lanterns were still a rarity in Japan, and Black launches into a lengthy explanation of them: “Now then, there are several varieties of the magic lantern device. As is well known, some use writing on glass plates that is projected onto white paper screen or a wall. There are also magic lanterns commonly used by students in school, but those are mere toys, hardly suitable for science. It is better to use a microscope. No matter how tiny a thing is, when placed inside this device and projected, it is magnified many times greater in size. Truly all manner of things can be understood by studying them under a microscope. There is a similar kind of expensive magic lantern used by scientists that can clearly project just about anything, so long as the material is not transparent, for instance, photographs printed on paper, picture postcards printed on thick paper or other things that fit into the projector. Today this was precisely the kind of magic lantern brought by Iwade Takejirō.” 14</p>
<p>As a result of this experiment, it is revealed that the murderer was a clerk at the bank, and in the end the young employee and the bank president’s daughter are happily married. There is a full, two-page illustration of the actual magic lantern in action. A large handprint is projected onto a white sheet, the whorls and lines of the five fingerprints clearly visible. In addition, there is a Western-style color lithograph typical of the era depicted on the front cover. A magic lantern sits on a table and a young lady in a Western dress with a corset and large bustle stands at one corner holding in her hand the bloodstained paper with the handprint. It is beautifully drawn.</p>
<p>To this day there is nary a clue whether this story was a creation of Black’s or a story he adapted from the plot of a British novel from that era. However, given that in his kōdan stories we find works by the popular British writer Lady Mary Elizabeth Braddon, whose works were also translated by Ruikō, I believe it is likely to have been adapted from a British novel. Whatever the original source may be, considering this work by an unknown author has been lost to the annals of detective fiction, it is all but impossible to uncover the truth from here in Japan. As the essay by Masaoka Iruru in the January 1946 issue of the journal Hōseki (The Jewel) entitled “The British Raconteur Black’s Detective Novel” remarks:</p>
<p>In the Meiji era, the British raconteur Kairakutei Black rivaled the great Enchō and Enshi I with his sentimental stories from the West... Black was brought to Japan with his father, a journalist, and assisted him in the business of publishing the Nisshin shinjishi newspaper. In the early years of Meiji, however, he was attracted by the popular oratorical performances of the People’s Rights Movement. From oratory he was drawn to kōdan storytelling and eventually became one of the most influential figures in the Sanyū school of storytellers. He passed away around the time of the Great Kanto Earthquake in the Taishō period. He stands alongside the magician Li Sai and musician John Vale 15 as non-Japanese who left a remarkable legacy in the cultural history of our popular theater.</p>
<p>In the same essay Masaoka states that he owns five books of Black’s transcribed stories: The Bloodstained Handprint at the Iwade Bank, The Coming of Daybreak, Poison Needle on the Carriage, The Orphan and Dew on Leaves of Grass. He also mentions that although he had The Magic Lantern, it was lost in the war. Masaoka may not have been aware of it, but the content of The Magic Lantern is the same as that of The Bloodstained Handprint at the Iwade Bank. If we put together a bibliography it would look something like this:</p>
<p>June 1893 Black’s performance of The Bloodstained Handprint at the Iwade Bank (Iwade ginkō chisen no tegata), transcribed in shorthand by Ishihara Meirin, published in its entirety in the third issue of the kōdan and rakugo magazine Azuma Nishiki. </p>
<p>December 8, 1893 The name of the performance changed to The Magic Lantern, which was transcribed by Imamura Jirō and published in a single hardcover volume by Sanyūsha of Kyōbashi. This is the version I have. It is the same small-sized format as Kuroiwa Ruikō’s early works.</p>
<p> 1903	Kōbunkan of Asakusa once again reprinted the text crediting Imamura Jirō as the stenographer, but now under the title The Bloodstained Handprint at the Iwade Bank. </p>
<p>The Murakami Library’s Meiji Literature Bibliography also provides details about the extent of Black’s authorship as follows.</p>
<p>December 1887 Black’s performance Dew on the Leaves of Grass (based on a story by Mary Elizabeth Braddon), as transcribed by Shitō Kenkichi and illustrated by Yoshitoshi, published in two hardcover volumes, 234 pages.</p>
<p>September 1892 Black’s translation and adaptation of the detective novel The Rose Maiden (author unknown), transcribed by Imamura Jirō and published by Sanyūsha in hardcover, 292 pages.</p>
<p>October 1892 Black’s adaptation of The Coming of Daybreak, transcribed by Imamura Jirō and published by Sanyūsha in hardcover, 261 pages.</p>
<p>October 1892 Black’s adaptation of the detective novel The Poison Pin in the Coach, transcribed by Imamura Jirō and published by Sanyūsha in hardcover, 186 pages.</p>
<p>1893	Black’s performance of The Magic Lantern, transcribed by Imamura Jirō and published by Sanyūsha in hardcover, 97 pages.</p>
<p>1897	The British true story The Orphan published by Kinōdō, 174 pages.</p>
<p>This makes seven works, including the aforementioned The Bloodstained Handprint at the Iwade Bank from 1903. It is beyond my resources to say whether there were any others besides them. The only ones I have in my collection are Dew on Leaves of Grass, The Magic Lantern and Poison Needle on the Carriage.16</p>
<p>Dickens and Poe </p>
<p>Dickens no senben · 1952</p>
<p>The first detective novel in England was Wilkie Collins’ The Moonstone (1868), which appeared twenty-seven years after Poe’s “The Murders in the Rue Morgue” (1841). Dickens’ incomplete work The Mystery of Edwin Drood was also a detective novel, but it was written at the even later date of 1870. Likewise, while one might make a case for Dickens’ Bleak House as a detective novel, it is well known that its publication in 1853 came a full twelve years after Poe’s “Rue Morgue.” </p>
<p>However, Dickens stole a jump on Poe by writing a long novel that crucially depended upon one of the major tricks in detective fiction. The weekly magazine Master Hamprey’s Clock, which Dickens himself presided over, began installments in its January 1841 issue of a work that would be completed and published by year’s end in book form. That work was Barnaby Rudge. “The Murders in the Rue Morgue” appeared in the April 1841 issue of Graham’s Magazine, which was edited by Poe, and therefore came out three months after Barnaby Rudge. (According to certain accounts, Dickens came up with a rough idea for the novel around 1838, and began to write it in the fall of 1840).</p>
<p>Poe had scarcely any personal contact with Dickens, but the little he had came about thanks to Barnaby Rudge. When this long novel of Dickens’ was complete, Poe wrote what was for him an uncharacteristically long review of it in the February 1842 issue of Graham’s Magazine. On the basis of this review, Dickens decided to meet with Poe. </p>
<p>The occasion for their meeting was Dickens’ famous first tour of America in March of 1842. They met at the United States Hotel in Philadelphia, where Poe lived and worked. Dickens, who was staying at the hotel, received a letter from Poe with a request to meet. Poe was thirty-three years old, and Dickens was thirty. Despite being three years Poe’s junior, Dickens was incomparably more celebrated an author. Dickens had a considerably large following in America and was considered a first-rate popular writer, while Poe was better known as the editor of Graham’s Magazine than as an author in his own right. Possessing a confidence of his own, Poe was not the type to prostrate himself before the greatest writer of the day, but he sent a letter to Dickens asking that they might meet. It was his secret hope that Dickens might use his influence to help get his works published in England. (This, however, ended in failure. Dickens accepted Poe’s request and spoke to publishers upon his return to England, but they rejected Poe’s work).</p>
<p>Poe included in his letter a copy of his collection of stories Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque published the previous year, and also the review of Barnaby Rudge which he had just written. It seems that Dickens only briefly glanced through the collection of stories, but he read the review in its entirety, which provoked an interest in Poe and led him to grant his request for a meeting. Poe and Dickens had two visits at the hotel, but they can hardly be said to have left a deep impression on Dickens. In his prodigious book on his travels through America, appropriately entitled American Notes, Poe’s name does not appear once. In response to Poe’s follow-up letters came a perfunctory reply explaining that his efforts had regrettably not come to fruition. While we can say with certainty that Poe was stimulated and influenced by Barnaby Rudge, Dickens betrayed almost no interest in Poe whatsoever.</p>
<p>As for the plot of Barnaby Rudge, I will only very briefly summarize here the major developments. This long narrative begins with the tragedy of the Haredale family. Haredale’s steward is a villain named Rudge. One night, he stabs Mr. Haredale to death and steals a sizable amount of money. He also kills the gardener, who happens upon the scene. He then dresses the gardener’s corpse in his own clothes, puts his ring on the gardener’s finger and his watch in the gardener’s pocket, and lowers him into the pond in the garden. Afterwards he tells his wife what he has done and tries to get her to run away with him, but she is an honest woman and does not go along with him. Lacking another alternative, Rudge swears his wife to silence and flees alone. Haredale has been murdered, and the steward and gardener are missing, so the initial suspicion falls in their direction. More than a month passes before the dead body of the gardener is discovered, but his face has become unrecognizable. Judging from his clothing and possessions, it is determined that the body belongs to the steward, so the gardener is believed to be the perpetrator of a double murder.</p>
<p>Rudge’s forsaken wife is pregnant and gives birth to a baby boy the day after the murders take place. This boy, Barnaby Rudge, is the protagonist of the novel. Barnaby is slightly soft in the head and has a reddish birthmark on his arm like a splotch of blood. In addition, he has an innately morbid fear of blood. When Barnaby gets older, he raises a pet raven and loves it like a dear friend. </p>
<p>The raven is what we typically call a “big crow” (ōkarasu) in Japanese, but I gather that it’s a bit smaller than the species we have here. Like a myna bird, it can imitate human voices. Dickens also had a pet raven, and there are quite a few descriptions of ravens throughout the novel. Poe was dissatisfied with Dickens’ use of the raven, and observed that he would do things his way when the opportunity arose. This was realized some time later, and in a different form, in his poetic masterpiece “The Raven.” For this alone, Poe would appear to owe a great debt to Barnaby Rudge. </p>
<p>When Barnaby is a boy, there is a religious riot led by Lord George Gordon.1 This momentous event actually took place in London from 1779 to 1780, and the novel follows the timeline of its progression. Barnaby joins in the riot, but even in the thick of battle he keeps his beloved raven close at hand. His father, the murderer Rudge, who had covered his own tracks so well, also participates in the rioting, a scene that stretches on at considerable length. Towards the end of the episode when the two are both imprisoned, they meet in jail for the first time and are reconciled as father and son. The murderer Rudge confesses his old crime and the mystery with which the novel began is resolved. </p>
<p>Since Rudge’s wife did her utmost to keep her husband’s crime and indeed his very existence a secret, the novel is rife with uncertainty and suspense. One night the murderer Rudge sneaks into his wife’s house to demand money. The scene is witnessed from a third-person perspective, and the reader is led to conclude this must be the spirit of the steward submerged in the pond long before. This part has the flavor of a ghost story, but Rudge’s confession in jail effectively dispels all doubt about this and other related developments along the way.</p>
<p>As it turns out, not only did Poe write a lengthy review of Barnaby Rudge, but he also wrote an article in the May 1, 1841 issue of the Philadelphia Sunday Times when the novel’s serialization had scarcely even begun, exposing the trick which Dickens withheld until the end. The serialization of Rudge began in January of the same year, so the story was roughly at its midpoint by May, but Poe did not even need to read that far. From the first seven pages (the end of the first chapter) out of a total of three hundred twenty-three pages (it had a long run in the magazine), Poe claimed that he already knew the secret of the murderer. </p>
<p>Although Poe’s theory that the murderer first killed a stand-in for the butler and then Haredale was in slightly the wrong order, he was more or less accurate on other counts and correctly identified the essential ploy. It is noteworthy that Poe guessed the criminal’s identity and published it in a newspaper, and all the more so that it came from a major novel by Dickens. It is still more impressive, however, to consider that over one hundred years later, the trick Dickens employed remains one of the most critically acclaimed and frequently used in detective fiction: the primary archetype of “the victim as the true murderer.” 2</p>
<p>As for Poe’s long review of Barnaby Rudge, his critique approaches it from the perspective of the detective novel, paying close attention to the riddle of the murderer’s identity and its solution. From a less sympathetic viewpoint, Poe viewed the religious riot which is the novel’s central attraction as a distraction from the riddle and its suspense. He strongly suspected that Dickens stumbled upon the idea of the Gordon riots by chance and decided to insert it into the novel halfway through serialization (Poe analyzes the original text and offers examples to prove it). Somewhat unwittingly then, Dickens wound up devoting his energy to a description of the riots. This type of digression, Poe laments, is one of the major shortcomings of serialized fiction.</p>
<p>But Poe’s critique also provided fodder for the completely opposite position. Writing an afterward to a later edition of Barnaby Rudge, Andrew Lang opined that if what Poe said was correct, than removing the part which deals with the riot merely renders the novel insipid. Even if the plot is weakened by the long digression about the riot, the strength of the novel is not plot alone. That sort of business can be left to the likes of Wilkie Collins. For Dickens, Lang maintains, realistic description of group psychology in the Gordon riots has a value all its own. No doubt the majority of readers today will agree with Lang’s assessment, but Dickens himself had great interest in the aforementioned ploy of detective fiction: so much, in fact, that he was inspired to write Barnaby Rudge in the first place.</p>
<p>Poe wrote only three detective stories in the strict definition of the term, or five under a more lenient tabulation. Yet in spite of a paucity of works, he wove into the ones he wrote more than his fair share of highly original tricks. More than one hundred years later, there are very few paradigmatic tricks that have been handed down to us which Poe was unaware of. Nevertheless such crucial ploys as accusing the victim of the crime, turning the murderer into the victim, and having the victim turn out to be the one who truly committed the crime – in short, the most commonly used set of devices in the history of detective fiction which revolve around the positions of the murderer and the victim – were never once used by Poe. This appears to be an inexplicable aspect of Poe’s detective novels, but the key to understanding this enigma lies with Dickens’ Barnaby Rudge. </p>
<p>Poe’s innate love of detective fiction led him to intuitively grasp the trick in Rudge which, more than one hundred years later, is used ad nauseum everywhere and by everyone. I can’t help thinking how unfortunate it was that Dickens stole a jump on him. On the other hand, if not for Dickens provoking his interest, would Poe have published his exposé of the real murderer or his long review of Rudge? By the same token, isn’t it just as likely the trick that beat him to the punch was one Poe considered beneath his talents? There are dozens of reworkings of this trick, many of which remain in vogue today, but in the early years of the genre when these archetypes were being developed, one can readily imagine how a writer of Poe’s careful deliberation viewed the situation. No matter how skillfully he might come up with a different take on this theme, it would not have been his desire to reuse a pattern already employed by the celebrated writer from across the Atlantic.</p>
<p>In any case, a renowned author like Dickens stole a march on Poe, the master of innovation, by writing a long novel that used what is now the most famous trick in the history of detective fiction. None of the scholars of the detective novel in the West have discussed this, but with regard to the study of detective fiction in general, and its formative period in particular, it strikes me as an extremely fascinating and important episode.</p>
<p>An Eccentric Idea</p>
<p>Kikyō na chakusō · 1955</p>
<p>In the past, detective novelists, particularly the British and Americans in the Anglo-Saxon tradition, have devised some truly eccentric sleight-of-hand literary tricks.</p>
<p>In 1954 I put together An Itemized Catalog of Tricks, a list of over eight hundred tricks that appear mainly in classic British and American detective novels. I filled up more than one hundred and fifty pages in the handwritten manuscript of this beginner’s guide, then re-wrote a portion of it in a more readable style and had it published in a magazine. For instance, there were topics such as “the uses of ice as a deadly weapon,” “faceless corpses,” “disappearing tricks,” and “crimes of probability,” to name a few.</p>
<p>I would like to take this opportunity to pick up several of the more unusual developments from the Catalog of Tricks which do not overlap with those I have just mentioned, and discuss them in closer detail. They are drawn from old works, so they should not appear wholly unfamiliar to connoisseurs of detective fiction, but there are also a good number of refreshingly innovative ideas in these works of yesteryear. I hope the average reader will also find them of interest.</p>
<p>The Killer Who is Not Human</p>
<p>Whenever there is a murder case, our first assumption is that the killer must be human. To catch us off guard, writers deftly produce a culprit who is not human, as Edgar Allan Poe, the father of the detective novel, did with his unprecedented “The Murders in the Rue Morgue.” The investigation in that story was solely concerned with finding a human murderer until it unexpectedly comes to light that an orangutan was responsible. Detective novelists have subsequently expanded this idea to include virtually every beast known to man – birds, insects etc. –  as the killer in order to produce the element of surprise. Likewise, there is the counter situation where an animal is suspected of a crime, but it turns out to be the work of human hands. This is another variation of the same trick.</p>
<p>There is a circus with a lion tamer who regularly pries open the jaws of the lion and puts his head inside the lion’s mouth. One performance in a thousand turns fatal. One day the lion tamer puts his head in the lion’s mouth before a crowd, when something goes terribly wrong – the lion clamps shut its jaws on the man’s neck. In the blink of an eye, the lion tamer is dead.</p>
<p>It is strange for such a well-trained lion to bite its master, but when the matter is investigated, a witness materializes who claims to have seen the lion wrinkling its nose and laughing right before the murder took place. It’s truly frightening to think of a lion laughing.</p>
<p>Eventually a human culprit is arrested. The secret plot was not uncovered in time, but we learn that another member of the circus bore a grudge against the lion tamer and devised an ingenious plan to use the lion act to cover his tracks. Unbeknownst to the lion tamer, the man sprinkles sneezing powder in the lion tamer’s hair. When the lion tamer puts his head in the lion’s mouth, the lion sneezes, which causes the lion to snap his mouth shut just as the man anticipated. When the culprit first tested the sneezing powder by sprinkling it in the lion’s mouth, the lion laughed. Or rather, his nose twitched and he made a face like he was laughing. Although this was a short story written in England over thirty years ago, it would be interesting to see this plot adapted as a torimonochō.1 But it might have been done before.</p>
<p>A more unusual approach to the non-human killer was to use a wooden doll that shoots a pistol to kill the victim. A life-size doll stands in a room. A man sleeping in the room is shot with a pistol in the middle of the night. The door was locked from within, and there is no evidence of entry from the outside. Upon closer inspection, the doll is found to be holding a pistol in its right hand. The gun has recently fired off one bullet. The doll has murdered the man.</p>
<p>When the truth comes out, naturally there is a human culprit responsible. He positioned a vase of some kind directly above the doll, and it released drop after drop of water like rain onto the hand of the doll holding the pistol. This continued for several hours until the damp wood swelled up and the doll’s finger moved, pulling the trigger on the pistol. 2</p>
<p>A more eccentric idea is to use the sun as the killer. Of course I’m not talking about sunstroke. When in Camus’s The Stranger the protagonist kills a man because of the sun, it’s not necessarily psychological. There is a purely physical explanation for it.</p>
<p>A man is shot to death in a locked room. A hunting rifle was left on a tabletop some distance from the victim, and it is determined that live ammunition was fired from the gun. But there is no trace of the murderer’s comings and goings. Since the rifle could not possibly have fired itself, this makes for an exceedingly difficult case. A famous detective who appears on the scene declares, “This is the work of the sun and a water jar.” The plot thickens.</p>
<p>The detective explains that sunlight coming in through the window struck the water jar on the tabletop, turning the flask-shaped glass container into a magnifying lens. It focused upon the old-fashioned rifle’s match cord, accidentally setting it aflame and causing it to fire off a shot. This device was used by the old American detective writer Post and the Frenchman Leblanc, but back when I was a student I arrived at the same idea independent of them and wrote a clumsy short story. In terms of chronology, Post and I wrote our stories at about the same time, while Leblanc came later. 3</p>
<p>The Two Rooms</p>
<p>One man, Mr. A, is invited by another man, Mr. B, to his office on the first floor of a building in the middle of the night. They drink and chat, with Mr. B watching carefully for the moment when Mr. A drops his guard. When an opportunity presents itself, Mr. B pounces on him without warning, gags him and ties his hands and feet to the sofa. Then he brings in a black box ticking like a clock – a time bomb set to go off in a certain number of hours and minutes. “This is how long you have left to live,” says B, who shoves the box under the sofa and walks away. Mr. A is struck with tremendous fright and struggles against his bonds, but he quickly loses consciousness. The alcohol he drank was laced with a powerful sedative.</p>
<p>He doesn’t know how long he slept, but when A opens his eyes, he is still tied up as before in Mr. B’s office. He instantly remembers the time bomb. He can hear a ticking sound under the sofa. He glances at the clock on the wall and sees there are less than two minutes left before it explodes. He writhes in desperation, and somehow the ropes loosen. In a flurry, he flings them off, but now only thirty seconds remain. Without further hesitation he sprints from the room. Down the hall is a door leading outside. On the other side of the door it should be no more than three steps down a stone staircase to freedom. He races up to the door, and miraculously it isn’t locked. He opens the door and crosses the threshold. In that instant, A lets out a cry as he plunges into a bottomless hole. Where on earth did such a deep hole come from? Therein lies the rub. A was convinced he was on the first floor, but he was actually moved to the ninth floor. The door he thought led outside was in fact the door to the elevator, and he plummeted down the elevator shaft. Of course Mr. A loses his life.</p>
<p>The villain Mr. B made up a room on the ninth floor identical in every respect to his office on the first floor. The drugged Mr. A was dragged up to the ninth floor and tied to a sofa just like the one on the first floor. Mr. B also removes the markings on the door to the elevator in the hallway. This trick depends upon two rooms that are alike down to most trivial details – the carpeting, wallpaper, chairs, table, pictures hanging on the walls, the clock on the wall, etc.</p>
<p>Since it is recognized that Mr. A’s death from falling down the elevator shaft was an accident, the murderer avoids detection. Even if it was known that rooms on the first and ninth floor were decorated in identical fashion, it would be quite difficult to establish that this was directly linked to Mr. A’s death by falling. This was a story written some thirty-odd years ago, but I found it so entertaining, the impression has remained fresh in my mind.4</p>
<p>Years later the eminent American detective writers Carr and Queen used this trick of “the two rooms” in a different fashion. Queen in particular brilliantly expanded this trick into “two buildings,” in a novel about a large, three-story stone building which vanishes overnight without a trace.5</p>
<p>The Disappearing Train</p>
<p>Speaking of disappearances, a certain famous English detective novelist came up with a truly eccentric idea.6 One night when a long freight train from Station X arrives at Station Y, a car in the middle goes missing. The car was unquestionably there when the train departed from Station X, but in spite of the fact that the train didn’t stop once along the way to Station Y, it somehow vanished like smoke. The car was laden with many valuable works of art. Of course, they too have been stolen. It is physically impossible for a car right smack in the middle of a moving train to disappear. Baffled to think how on earth someone pulled this off, the reader skips from page to page with nerve-racking suspense.</p>
<p>How did the author make the impossible possible? He devised a truly ambitious act of prestidigitation.</p>
<p>In the deserted mountains between Station X and Station Y, there is a derelict branch line of the railroad. The criminal mastermind makes use of it. If he can get the targeted freight car onto the branch line, reconnect the rear half of the train and send it safely on to Station Y, then the disappearing trick will be a success. Such is the ploy.</p>
<p>Three accomplices are needed. Accomplice A sneaks into the freight train, Accomplice B lies in wait at the switch point of the branch line, and Accomplice C leaps into the car sliding down the branch line and pressed down on the foot break. </p>
<p>Before the train departs the station, thick ropes with hooks at both ends are hidden in the freight car. No sooner has the train left Station X than Accomplice A hooks the ropes to on the cars in front and back, running them along the outside of the targeted car. In this way, the thick ropes connect the cars in front and behind to each other.</p>
<p>When the train nears the branch line, A releases the fastening rods to the front and back cars, so that only the ropes are holding them together. Accomplice B, who is waiting at the point, watches for the front wheels of the car to cross the fork in the line and throws the switch quick as lightning, sending the targeted car down the branch line. He also doesn’t waste a second yanking the switch back up the very instant its rear wheels clear the fork. Thus only the targeted car enters the branch line, while the remaining cars are pulled along on the main line by the ropes. The waiting Accomplice C leaps into the lone freight car on the branch line and bears down on the foot break with all his strength. He brings the freight car to a stop right where it can be hidden in the middle of a thick forest. This way they can cart away the works of art inside at their leisure.</p>
<p>Accomplice A, who is still on the train, jumps to the car in front as soon as the freight car is released, grasps hold of the iron ladder next to the connection joint and compresses his body. When at last the train approaches Station Y and its speed slackens, inertia brings the rear of the train held in tow by ropes up to the front half and they collide with a crash. Accomplice A does not miss his chance to lock the connecting joints on the two halves and to throw the coils of rope to the ground. Then he jumps from the train himself, gathers up the ropes and makes himself scarce. In this way a car from a freight train bound from Station X to Station Y miraculously vanishes like smoke.</p>
<p>Speaking of disappearing trains, Arthur Conan Doyle came up with an eccentric idea that topped this one.7 A special express train consisting entirely of reserved passenger cars such as are often used in England vanishes like a ghost between Stations A and B.</p>
<p>Station B receives a phone call that the train in question is now in transit from Station A, but regardless of how long they wait, the train never arrives. Instead the train that left Station A behind the train in question pulls into Station B. They ask the engineer if the previous train broke down along the way, but that turns out not to be the case. He replies that there was no sign of another train. The train is gone as surely as if it had flown up into the air. There are no branch lines along the way, either.</p>
<p>When the feat is revealed, it proves to be a crime involving many accomplices secretly hidden on board without the knowledge of the esteemed gentleman who chartered the train. Although there is no branch line between Stations A and B, there was formerly a line leading to a mine. Since the mine has been long abandoned there was no further need for the line, and to prevent accidents, the rails were removed from the immediate vicinity of the main line. Therefore, no one bothers to pay it serious consideration. But the mastermind of the crime uses this to his advantage. His band of accomplices bring a quantity of rails there and under the cover of darkness rapidly restore the branch line to the abandoned mine. Another accomplice boards the engine before departure and threatens the engineer with a pistol, making him turn the train down the hastily erected branch line. The engineer has to bring the train to full speed, then both he and the gunman jump from the train as it hurtles toward the mine. At the end of the branch line is a massive pit, so the train with all its passengers and crew plunge headfirst into the bottom of a deep pit. There are no houses nearby in these desolate mountains, and the tracks leading to the mine are shielded on both sides by tall cliffs, so from a distance no one can see the crazy train hurtling out of control. </p>
<p>Faked Deaths </p>
<p>There are quite a few eccentric ideas about faked deaths. One method is to use a person’s professional calling for murder in order to make the crime look like a suicide.</p>
<p>In a room in an apartment, the corpse of a man is found, who committed suicide by firing a pistol into his own mouth. At his side is a pistol. It shows signs of having been fired, and the fingerprints found on the pistol’s surface all belong to the dead man. Naturally, the case is deemed a suicide. After all, there are no signs of resistance to putting the tip of the gun in his mouth, which would be unthinkable if it were a homicide.    </p>
<p>But it is, in fact, precisely that. There is only one occupation that could be used to make this murder look like a suicide: the killer is a dentist. It’s not that a throat specialist couldn’t do it, either, but the dentist is simply more convenient. While the dentist is treating a fellow he holds a grudge toward, he sticks the barrel of a concealed pistol into the patient’s mouth and pulls the trigger. The patient has his eyes tightly shut and his mouth wide open. It is the perfect crime. All that remains is to drag the corpse to an empty apartment in another part of town, and deposit the pistol covered with the victim’s fingerprints at his side. This was a short story by an obscure British writer.8</p>
<p>Another example is to make others think you are dead – the trick being to erase your presence from the world. This is difficult to accomplish without fulfilling several conditions, but early one morning a man we will call Mr. A falls from a rocky outcropping on the coast during a heavy storm. His friend, who witnesses it, rushes to the outcropping in shock and calls his name but to no avail. Mr. A is pale and unconscious. The friend cannot help but conclude he is dead. To be on the safe side, the friend checks the pulse on Mr. A’s right wrist, but it has completely stopped, so he quickly runs to the nearest house to notify a doctor and the police. As soon as his friend is no longer in sight, the fallen man Mr. A audaciously picks himself up and runs away. Later it is determined that Mr. A’s body was swept out to sea by the waves. Thus Mr. A erases himself from the world.</p>
<p>How did he manage to stop his pulse? It is a magician’s sleight-of-hand. Under his arm he keeps something like a small ball pressed to his side that applies pressure to the artery in his arm. As a result, the pulse in his wrist disappears. The culprit deftly made use of a clever parlor trick. This was in a work by Carr.9</p>
<p>A waterlogged corpse is discovered floating in a river. An autopsy is performed which concludes the man was an ordinary victim of drowning. But it is actually a case of homicide. The murderer had filled up a washbowl with river water and carried it back to his room. He invites over the man he intends to kill, waits for his chance and then pushes the man’s head down, forcing his face into the washbowl. Eventually the man quits struggling. The man swallows river water into his stomach and lungs, and suffocates to death. The murderer surreptitiously throws the corpse into the river. This technique has been talked about for ages, so almost everyone has heard of it, but it first appeared in a novel by Crofts.10  The idea of a man drowning to death in a small washbowl is eccentric to say the least. But outside the bounds of fiction, the victim would really have to be a helpless invalid for such a crime to be remotely possible.</p>
<p>A certain person is encouraged to always wear a cloth around his neck that is made from the fiber of a plant that undergoes extreme constriction when it comes into contact with water. This could work well with a doctor and a patient who complains of throat trouble. The best location would be somewhere in the equatorial belt. Alternatively, it could be set aboard a steamship navigating through the equator. There is a tropical squall. People are delighted and expose their bodies to the cooling shower. Suddenly the cloth wrapped around the intended victim’s neck begins to tighten with alarming force. He struggles desperately as his breath gives out. I read about this scenario in a crime essay, but I don’t know the name of the plant.11</p>
<p>A Desire for Transformation </p>
<p>Henshin ganbō · 1954</p>
<p>The thought has occasionally crossed my mind to write a story about a person who becomes a book: I mean to say, a person who is literally transformed into print. This wouldn’t be a tale for adults, but rather boys’ literature. It would require a tome along the lines of a big Western dictionary such as the Britannica or Century, or even the Heibonsha Encyclopedia in Japan – but just the cover, which would be fashioned by a specialist, then joined to the person’s back like the shell of a tortoise. On a big bookshelf he would expose his back, fold up his arms and legs, and settle in. To the casual observer it would appear to be just another large dictionary, but inside a human being would be concealed, holding his breath. It’s a truly foolish idea, but horror novels gradually take shape from this kind of absurd premise.</p>
<p>Many years ago I wrote about a man who becomes a chair. It was also a silly idea, but my thoughts developed until eventually I was able to elaborate the amusing premise of a person turning into a chair into the short story “The Human Chair.” It was quite warmly received upon its debut.1 </p>
<p>Human beings are never satisfied with themselves just as they are. The desire to become a dashing prince, a knight, or a lovely princess is the most common in the world, so it is fair to say that the heroes and heroines who appear in popular literature are created to satisfy those aspirations. Children’s dreams are more daring. With apologies to the children’s literature of today, there were many stories in the old days that relied on the power of magic to turn people into stone statues or birds or beasts. These stories reveal a yearning to become something else.</p>
<p>In the old days there was the fantasy of becoming a person of miniscule stature. In the fairy tale Tom Thumb, the hero uses a sewing needle for a sword and a bowl for a boat. In the Edo period there was a series of erotic books featuring “Bean Man.” Sorcery shrunk his body to the size of a bean so that he could pass without detection. He could hide in the bosom of a beautiful woman or slip inside the sleeve of a playboy, listening and watching to his heart’s content without drawing undue attention. In Western erotic literature, there is the story of a flea that uses the same principle by different means, only it takes even greater liberties. With the human body like a mountain range, the little fellow inquisitively explores all its nooks and crannies.</p>
<p>“If I were a board, a board in a bath, I could caress the skin of the girl I love!” runs an ancient Greek comic verse. I believe there are similar poems in Japan. Under the right conditions, human beings will even want to become wooden planks in a bathtub. </p>
<p>In a more exalted dimension, divine figures often assume different guises. They can take any form they please. A god transforms into a beggar covered with boils from head to toe to see if human beings will treat it kindly. Those who do are handsomely rewarded. Whether bird, beast or fish, deities take a multitude of forms. Since gods and goddesses symbolize human ideals, longing for the power to change shape must be one of our most fundamental desires. At the very least it bears testament to humanity’s fondness for transformation.</p>
<p>Because of this desire, when we survey world literature we can see a continuum of “tales of transformation” since ancient times. It would be interesting for someone to do a historical study along these lines, but at present I don’t have the necessary store of learning. Closer to our own time, I read two modern tales of transformation this past year with great interest. One was Kafka’s Metamorphosis (translated in the journal Shinchō), the other a novel by contemporary French author Marcel Aymé,2 entitled The Second Face (no Japanese translation). These two works are not about the desire for transformation, but play on the misery of being transformed against one’s will. It is the reversal of the desire for transformation.</p>
<p>Since the former is so well known, I will say a word or two about the latter. This work by Aymé has just come out. Gallimard originally published it in 1951. I read the Harper’s edition in English translation. It was published by itself in a single volume, although it is a mid-length rather than a long novel.3 </p>
<p>One day a middle-aged businessman with a wife and child is suddenly turned into a handsome young man in his twenties. When asked to show personal identification at the window of a government office, he takes out a photograph of himself that makes the official adopt a strange expression.</p>
<p>“Did you take someone else’s photograph by mistake?”</p>
<p>“No, this is my photograph.”</p>
<p>The official thinks he is crazy. The photo shows an ordinary balding and paunchy man in his fifties or sixties. The man in front of the official is a handsome young man full of life. The official figures the young man is either playing a joke on him or crazy. He decides upon the latter and kindly sends the young man on his way. At first the man doesn’t understand what is wrong. But as he walks along, he accidentally catches a glimpse of his reflection in a show window and is taken aback. His eyes must be playing tricks on him, but try as he might to prove otherwise, it is definitely he. He has been reborn as a handsome youth such that he can scarcely recognize himself. From the standpoint of a “desire for transformation,” the man should be delighted, but because he is an ordinary man with money, social standing, and a wife and child who love him, he isn’t happy. He is merely upset. A nihilist alone in the world or a murderous villain would be enraptured, but a realistic company man can’t be. He is afraid to go home. He worries that his wife will not accept him.</p>
<p>He has nowhere else to go, so he pays a visit to a friend and relates what has happened His friend does not believe a word of it. On the contrary, he is suspicious. In the real world, there is absolutely no possibility for a metamorphosis on the order of children’s fables. The young man who made up this story must have kidnapped the wealthy businessman, or maybe has already killed him. The friend conjectures that if the young man can assume the businessman’s identity, he can steal his fortune. The friend is a poet, so he knows all about crimes of duplicity.</p>
<p>From this point The Second Face takes on the air of a detective story. Although Aymé is not a detective writer, this novel has many elements in common with detective fiction. For example, Tanizaki Junichirō’s The Story of Tomoda and Matsunaga, or closer at hand, my short story “The Impersonation,” were based on the flipside of the idea worked out by Aymé.</p>
<p>The transformed man doesn’t know what to do with himself. He doesn’t have the courage to start his life over as a handsome young man, unknown and without documents. He does not want to relinquish his fortune, or give up his family. As a last resort, he comes up with a strategy. He will rent a room under a different name in the same building where he lived as the businessman, and he will seduce his own wife to get her to fall in love with him. His former self, that is to say, the woman’s husband, no longer exists, so there should be no impediments. In the end they will marry, and he can return to his family. Such is his plan. No matter how he looks at it, there doesn’t seem to be any alternative. </p>
<p>Nevertheless, he finds himself in the bizarre situation of romancing his wife as a different man. I, too, was deeply interested in these kinds of circumstances in my earlier works “The Impersonation” and “The Carbuncle.” The wife is a beautiful and flirtatious woman, so the plan succeeds with unexpected ease. Success brings an altogether unusual mix of feelings. Your wife is cheating on you. Moreover, her lover is you. The happiness of the handsome young man and the resentment of the fifty-year-old former husband are interwoven.</p>
<p>This secret love cannot be revealed in front of his child or the neighbors, so naturally they arrange to meet outside. Things are proceeding apace when the poet sees them walking together hand in hand. His expression when he sees them says it all. Without a doubt he believes the young man’s diabolic plan is coming to fruition; he has already gotten his hands on his friend’s wife. The young man aims to steal his friend’s wife and fortune. There’s no mistaking it. To make matters worse, the friend is still unaccounted for – a week, ten days, and still he has not returned. Something is seriously wrong. That pretty-faced young scoundrel must have killed him. I can’t just stand by and do nothing. I better contact the police and have them look into it. The transformed man can intuitively tell his friend is thinking along these lines.</p>
<p>After pondering what can be done, the transformed man decides to take his wife and run far away. It isn’t easy to come up with a persuasive rationale, but somehow he is on the verge of convincing his wife. It is only now that he is in a real pinch that he seems to waken from the nightmare – his appearance reverts back to normal. He is napping in a restaurant and when he awakens with a start, he is once more his former self, the middle-aged businessman. </p>
<p>Breathing a sigh of relief that it is finally over, he nevertheless feels slightly regretful not to have made more of his adventure.</p>
<p>He goes back to his family as his former self. He explains his absence by saying urgent business required him to travel abroad. With the handsome young man out of the way, he and his wife resume their previous lives. But now a peculiar psychological problem develops. The man who has returned to being a middle-aged businessman cannot forget his wife’s infidelity, even though he was personally responsible for it to begin with. His wife has wiped her hands clean of the affair, and carries on as though nothing has changed. She behaves like a chaste woman who has never known another man besides her husband. He, too, keeps his silence. More than hatred, he feels compassion. He was the seducer of his own wife, so there is no sense getting angry. Instead he feels conflicted. This complex psychological state emerges through the fictional device of metamorphosis. I love stories that make use of such devices.</p>
<p>I read another of Aymé’s works in English translation with great enjoyment.4 One day a halo inexplicably appears over the head of an ordinary office worker. It is the same ring of light that shines over the heads of angels and saints. If he were a deeply religious man he might look upon it as a gift from God, but the office worker simply regards it as a big nuisance. He can’t walk down the street. People will point and laugh at him. As a temporary measure, he hides it under a large hat. He even wears the hat inside the office. But the deception cannot go on for long. He is ridiculed everywhere he goes, his wife denounces him and he curses the glory of God. Finally, instead of praying to God to make the halo disappear, he tries to rid himself of it by earning the wrath of God. In a word, he sins. He begins with lies and gradually builds up to more serious crimes, but the halo does not go away. The story unfolds with the man steeping himself deeper in sin and committing increasingly terrible transgressions... I look forward to reading more of Aymé’s novels.</p>
<p>I’ve drifted from the original topic, but in case it was not apparent from the thumbnail sketches above, I want to emphasize that even as Aymé’s works depend on a reversal of the desire for transformation, they also depict the wonders of metamorphosis. Reversal or not, works of fiction such as these could not be written by an author unfamiliar with the desire for transformation.</p>
<p>The yearning to look different: to show how truly universal it is, we need only think of makeup. Makeup basically brings about a small-scale metamorphosis. When I was a boy, my friends and I liked to put on theatrical plays. When we dressed like women and put on cosmetics in front of a mirror, it was a queer sort of pleasure, a wondrous experience. Actors make a living from this desire for transformation. In the span of one day they can be reborn as countless different people.</p>
<p>Naturally, the use of disguise in detective novels also tries to satisfy the desire for transformation. Reduced to the level of a gimmick, the use of disguise is no longer particularly fresh or interesting today, but disguise as an idea retains its appeal. The apex of disguise novels is probably a work where someone is completely transfigured by plastic surgery. The representative text on this subject is the famous pre-war work The President’s Mystery Story by Anthony Abbott.5 I have frequently written about it in the past, so I won’t repeat the same conclusions here, but it adequately demonstrates the possibility of becoming a different person through plastic surgery. It is a modern version of the art of the ninja, the cutting edge of contemporary camouflage. In this sense, the desire for transformation is also linked to the desire to conceal oneself.</p>
<p>Notes</p>
<p>Translator’s Introduction</p>
<p>1➥ In this book, Japanese names are given in Japanese order, with the surname preceding the given name. In Japan, it is customary to refer to particularly respected cultural figures using the given name: thus Edogawa Rampo is referred to as “Rampo.” To be consistent with what has become the standard version of his name in English, the middle consonant in “Rampo” is romanized as “m” rather than the usual “n.”</p>
<p>2➥ To cite one recent example in the publishing industry, the April 2008 issue of the magazine Serai included a lavishly illustrated, ten-page article entitled “On the Trail of Japan’s Famous Mysteries” with considerable attention devoted to Rampo. Equally telling, the detective novels shown on the cover are all examples of his work. The Tōbu Department Store in Ikebukuro, Tokyo, held an “Edogawa Rampo and Twentieth Century Popular Culture Exhibition” in 2004. The exhibit coincided with 130th anniversary of Rikkyō University, which had been given custodianship of Rampo’s estate in 2002. Located in Ikebukuro, the Edogawa Rampo House includes the traditional storehouse, nicknamed “the phantom castle” (geneijō), that houses his private library and personal papers. </p>
<p>3➥ A stylized genre of erotica films by the Nikkatsu Studio which includes director Tanaka Noboru’s version of Yaneura no sanposha (English title: Watcher in the Attic, 1976).  </p>
<p>4➥ As Harris relates in his preface to Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination (Rutland: Tuttle, 1956) they labored under unusual and difficult circumstances owing to their respective linguistic limitations: “Edogawa Rampo, while fully capable of reading and understanding English, lacks the ability to write or speak it. On the other hand, the translator, a Eurasian of English-Japanese parentage, while completely fluent in spoken Japanese, is quite unable to read or write the language, as he was educated solely in English schools” (p. xi). Meeting on weekly basis for five years, they faced unmentioned hardships as well: three of the five years took place during the American Occupation as Tokyo slowly recovered from the air raids that had destroyed substantial portions of the capital city.</p>
<p>5➥ This was partly enabled by reprinting selections from Japanese Tales. Edited by David Alexander, Tales for a Rainy Night: the Fourteenth Mystery Writers of America Anthology (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1961), included Rampo’s classic “The Human Chair.” This was followed by John Apostolou and Martin Greenberg’s anthology Murder in Japan: Japanese Stories of Crime and Detection (New York: Dembner Books, 1987), which featured “The Psychological Test” and “The Red Chamber” from Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination. J. Thomas Rimer and Van C. Gessel’s The Columbia Anthology of Modern Japanese Literature (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005) once again reprinted “The Human Chair.” These examples notwithstanding, translations of Rampo’s fiction into French, Russian and other languages in the intervening years have, in fact, far outnumbered those in English. </p>
<p>6➥ The monographs in question are Sari Kawana’s Murder Most Modern: Detective Fiction and Japanese Culture (Minneapolis: U. of Minnesota Press, 2008) and Mark Silver’s Purloined Letters: Cultural Borrowing and Japanese Crime Literature, 1868–1937 (Honolulu: U. of Hawaii Press, 2008). William J. Tyler’s anthology Modanizumu: Modernist Fiction from Japan, 1913–1938 (Honolulu: U. of Hawaii Press, 2008) includes “The Two-Sen Copper Coin” and retranslations of the “Imomushi” (The Caterpillar) and “Oshi-e to tabi suru otoko” (The Man with the Pasted Rag Picture) in Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination.</p>
<p>7➥ “Edo” was name of the city established by the Tokugawa shoguns as the administrative capital of Japan during the Tokugawa, or Edo, period (1603–1868). The name was changed to “Tokyo” in 1868, when Japan’s official capital was moved there from Kyoto during the Meiji Restoration. Rampo’s pseudonym refers to the meandering course of the Edo River, which flows through what is now Edogawa Ward (incorporated as one of the twenty-three wards of Tokyo in 1932, roughly a decade after Rampo coined his pen name).</p>
<p>8➥ Page numbers after quotations from Rampo’s work refer to the Kurodahan Press printed edition of this book.	</p>
<p>9➥ A photograph of pre-earthquake Asakusa appears immediately before the Translator’s Introduction. </p>
<p>10➥ Edgar Allan Poe, “A Dream Within a Dream,” 1849. Selected Prose and Poetry, p. 482. Emphasis in the original.</p>
<p>11➥ Charles Baudelaire, The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays, p. 5.</p>
<p>12➥ Baudelaire published numerous translations of Poe’s prose works and essays from 1852 to 1865.</p>
<p>13➥ Charles Baudelaire, The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays, p 9.</p>
<p>14➥ Edgar Allan Poe, Selected Prose and Poetry, p. 87. Emphasis in the original.</p>
<p>15➥ Walter Benjamin, “On Some Motifs in Baudelaire,” Illuminations, p. 172.</p>
<p>16➥ This is a literal translation of Edogawa Rampo 江戸川乱歩. Some may protest that this appellation makes Rampo sound like a character from a country music song. So be it. Miriam Silverberg’s Erotic, Grotesque, Nonsense (Berkeley: U. of California Press, 2006) suggestively describes the down-and-out atmospherics of interwar Asakusa as “honky tonk.” But in point of fact, Kōdansha’s authoritative Nihongo daijiten (The Great Japanese Dictionary) provides the English “ramble” as a synonym for yūho.</p>
<p>17➥ See Edogawa Rampo zenshū, vol. 28, pp. 50–51. </p>
<p>18➥ Donald Richie, “Foreword” to The Scarlet Gang of Asakusa, p. xviii. </p>
<p>19➥ Donald Richie, “Foreword” to The Scarlet Gang of Asakusa, p. 31.</p>
<p>20➥ See Edward Seidensticker, Tokyo Rising, p. 38.</p>
<p>21➥ Poe’s convictions on this score were symbolically affirmed by the Philadelphia Rare Book Department’s acquisition in 1971 of the taxidermied remains of Grip, Dickens’ prized pet raven.</p>
<p>22➥ Although Rampo saw no need for allegory, there is some unspoken irony in his observations of how Dickens all but ignored Poe’s criticisms and willingness to engage, considering how the Japanese admiration for Anglo-American detective fiction had been historically one-sided as well.</p>
<p>23➥ John Whitley, “Introduction” to Tales of Mystery and Imagination, p. xvi.</p>
<p>24➥ Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the 19th Century (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992).  </p>
<p>25➥ Women were not granted voting rights in Japan until 1946, when the Japanese Constitution was rewritten under the American Occupation. The women’s suffrage movement, which had been gaining strength since 1919, produced a suffrage bill that came very close to being enacted in 1931. Unfortunately, after the Manchurian Incident some six months later, the door was slammed shut on progressive politics for men and women alike. See Sharon Nolte, “Women’s Rights and Society’s Needs: Japan’s 1931 Suffrage Bill,” Comparative Studies in Society and History, Vol. 28, No. 4 (Oct., 1986), pp. 690–714.</p>
<p>26➥ Kawabata collaborated with director Kinugasa Teinosuke on the Cabinet of Dr. Caligari-inspired modernist film Kurutta Ippeiji (A Page of Madness, 1926), while Tanizaki worked with Thomas Kurihara on four films for Taikatsu Studios from 1920–21.</p>
<p>27➥ Rampo was, in fact, an avid collector of recording technologies. In “Gen’ei no jōshū” (The Phantom Lord, 1936) and “Katsuji to boku to” (My Love of the Printed Word, 1937), he writes extensively of the caseloads of printing type he accumulated in his youth, which motivated him to pursue a literary career. Rampo also owned several film projectors (Suzuki, Edogawa Rampo, p. 87).</p>
<p>28➥ This is what happens in the conclusion of Kawabata’s Snow Country (1935–1948). The fiery destruction of a movie theater brings full circle the visual relationship between the protagonist Shimamura and the young woman Yoko that began with the eerily cinematic, magic mirror-like effects of a train window by night.</p>
<p>29➥ See  Freud, “The Uncanny,” pp. 339–76.</p>
<p>30➥ As Pflugfelder notes, Kawabata Yasunari made a belated contribution, “[going] so far, in his 1948 work Shōnen (Boy), as to weave an entire novel out of actual diary entries, letters, and other compositions recording his love for a fellow schoolboy during the 1910s” (p. 305).</p>
<p>31➥ In actuality, the only work to be banned by the authorities was “The Caterpillar,” not for its graphic scenes of sexual depravity and domestic abuse by an increasingly sadistic wife upon her disabled husband, but for depicting in the first place a war veteran who returns home quadriplegic and mute. Nonetheless, if we can accept the premise I made earlier about the transgressiveness of murderous wives, it would seem the censors made a wise choice after all. This is especially true when we consider how the wife in “The Caterpillar” symbolically (or “uncannily”) castrates her husband by gouging out his eyes. Almost reaching the level of Greek (i.e., Oedipal) tragedy, the blinded husband elects to commit suicide by crawling to the well in the yard and plunging into the underworld of death.  </p>
<p>32➥ Sari Kawana, Murder Most Modern, p. 88.</p>
<p>33➥ I borrow this turn of phrase from Sabine Melchior-Bonnet’s captivating History of the Mirror, trans. Katherine Jewett (New York: Routledge, 2002), p. 4.</p>
<p>34➥ Sari Kawana, Murder Most Modern, pp. 88–97. See also Mark Silver’s cogent reading of this densely encoded text and its broader cultural implications in Purloined Letters, pp. 148–157.</p>
<p>35➥ The names of all the major male characters in Beast in the Shadows include Chinese characters from Rampo’s real name (Hirai Tarō) and the name Edogawa Rampo. See Edogawa Rampo zenshū, vol. 28, pp. 354–55.</p>
<p>36➥ The claim made in the trailer and print advertisements for the film.</p>
<p>37➥ Akin to a basic tenet of Jacques Lacan’s mirror stage, the young man argues that regardless of resemblance, the reflected image is in fact alienated from its viewer. Therein lies the crux of self-identity based on false recognition: the ego is formed at the same moment that the subject and his or her image are divided by the mirror.</p>
<p>The Stories</p>
<p>THE DAYDREAM</p>
<p>1➥ Mie is a technique in kabuki of freezing in an exaggerated pose for dramatic effect.</p>
<p>POISON WEEDS</p>
<p>1➥ Yose were popular variety theaters similar to vaudeville. </p>
<p>THE STALKER IN THE ATTIC</p>
<p>1➥ Dr. John Webster (1793–1850), a well-connected member of Boston high society and a lecturer in chemistry at Harvard University, murdered Dr. George Parkman, a friend and fellow medical doctor to whom he owed a sizable debt, in 1849. Parkman’s remains were discovered in the assay oven by a janitor who rightly suspected Webster of foul play.</p>
<p>2➥ As a young schoolmaster in 1745, Eugene Aram (1704–1759) murdered a friend and buried his body in his garden. The remains were discovered some thirteen years later, by which time Aram had become an accomplished philologist. He unsuccessfully conducted his own defense and was executed in 1759. The case was the inspiration for Edward Bulwer-Lytton’s novel Eugene Aram (1832). Other works by Bulwer-Lytton were translated and highly praised by Meiji literati in the 1870s and 1880s.</p>
<p>3➥ Thomas Wainewright (1794–1847), a painter and writer on art who published in prestigious British journals such as Blackwoods Magazine and The London Magazine in the early 1820s, was not only a known forger, but was also believed to have used strychnine to murder his sister-in-law, mother-in-law, and uncle for their fortunes and to collect on their life insurance policies.</p>
<p>4➥ Noguchi Osaburō was married to the sister of Noguchi Neisai ( 野口寧斎 ), a respected poet of kanshi (Japanese verse written using only Chinese characters). Neisai had leprosy, and was cared for by Osaburō’s wife. He died in 1905, and a short time later, Osaburō was arrested on suspicion of murdering a pharmacist. An old popular belief held that a medicinal tea made from the flesh of the buttocks would act as a stimulant and cure-all. Osaburō came under suspicion of murdering Kawai Sōsuke, an elementary-school aged boy who was killed in 1902, and whose body had been mutilated by the removal of flesh from the buttocks. He was also accused of having murdered his brother-in-law (because Neisai wanted his sister to divorce Osaburō), but there was insufficient evidence to bring charges against him for either this crime or the murder of Kawai Sōsuke. Osaburō was ultimately executed for murdering the pharmacist, and his connection to the other crimes remans a matter of speculation. </p>
<p>5➥ Henri Landru (1869–1922), an infamous French confidence trickster nicknamed “the Bluebeard of Gambais Villa” by the press, was executed for murdering ten women after marrying them in order to gain control of their money. Landru articulately proclaimed his innocence right up to the guillotine, and his trial was one of the great mass media events of the 1920s. </p>
<p>6➥ English solicitor Herbert Rouse Armstrong was convicted of poisoning his wife Katherine in 1921. The crime came to light when Armstrong attempted to murder a rival lawyer named Oswald Martin later the same year. Both cases involved the use of arsenic, which Armstrong maintained he kept for use as a weed-killer. He was hanged in 1922.</p>
<p>7➥ E.T.A Hoffman (1776–1822), a German writer noted for interweaving fantastical and realist elements in his fiction, and Émile Gaboriau (1832–1873), one of the great pioneers of the detective novel. </p>
<p>8➥ Dakki no Ohyaku was a yūjo (high-class prostitute) in the Gion district of Kyoto in the mid-eighteenth century. As the lover of a high-ranking official in the Akita clan, she was involved in a dispute in 1757 over who would become the next head of the Satake family, and thus the next daimyo. She later entered late Edo popular culture as the subject of various songs and entertainments. Uwabami Oyoshi is the lead character in a kabuki revenge drama originally staged in 1866, in which she becomes the lover of her husband’s murderer in order to avenge him.</p>
<p>9➥ Protéa was the lead character in a film serial begun by Victorin Jasset (1862–1913) in 1913. Josette Andriot (1886–1942) starred in the title role of Protéa, a glamorous international spy whose capers often involved daring thefts. Jasset was a pioneer director of film serials in detective, action, and other genres.</p>
<p>10➥ A hot springs resort in Tochigi Prefecture, north of Tokyo, famous for its rugged beauty and as a site of love suicides, including Ozaki Kōyō’s Gothic novel Konjiki Yasha (The Gold Demon, 1897–1903).</p>
<p>THE AIR RAID SHELTER</p>
<p>1➥ Four city-wide blazes and countless local fires afflicted Edo (Tokyo) during the Tokugawa period. The worst of these (the Meiroku era fire of 1657) caused destruction comparable to the 1945 B-29 raids.</p>
<p>2➥ Atsumori (by Zeami Motokiyo, 1363–1443) is one of the best known plays in the noh tradition. It is based on an episode in The Tale of the Heike in which a warrior turned monk encounters the ghost of a beautiful youth he had been forced to behead in battle.</p>
<p>3➥ Jisshukō (Ten Scents) combines a legend about a Japanese fox spirit with an episode from Chinese history. A traveling scene (michiyuki, 道行き) is a sung component of a noh play, in which a journey is described. </p>
<p>4➥ Tengu are goblin-like supernatural creatures, depicted with a red face and long nose, which also have the power of flight.</p>
<p>Doctor Mera’s Mysterious Crimes</p>
<p>1➥ See the Translator’s Introduction.</p>
<p>2➥ Yose were popular variety theaters similar to vaudeville. </p>
<p>3➥ A “child of Edo” – by extension, those born and bred in Tokyo.</p>
<p>4➥ Slang for the homeless or beggars derived from “lumpen proletariat.”</p>
<p>5➥ Gabriel Tarde’s (1843–1904) theory of imitation in The Laws of Imitation (1903) stressed the role of interpersonal relations and social environment in the formation of individual and group psychology. </p>
<p>6➥ In Buddhism, the image of the moon reflected in water is used as a didactic illustration of the illusory nature of reality.</p>
<p>7➥ The doctor’s last name translates into something like “eyelet.” His first name seems to be a playful reference to the Ryōsai Shi’i, an anthology in sixteen volumes of premodern Chinese ghost stories compiled by Hoshō Rei (1640–1715).</p>
<p>The Dancing Dwarf</p>
<p>1➥ 三曲万歳 (sankyoku manzai) was a form of popular entertainment that originated in the Edo period. A trio of performers – samisen, hand drum, and kokyū (a stringed instrument played with a bow) – performed a comical routine that derived its subject matter from the kabuki theater and other popular sources. It was a forerunner of contemporary manzai (the Japanese form of stand-up comedy).</p>
<p>2➥ Mie is a technique in kabuki of freezing in an exaggerated pose for dramatic effect.</p>
<p>The Essays</p>
<p>The Horrors of Film</p>
<p>1➥ A professional narrator, similar to those in the bunraku puppet theater, who provided a virtuoso explanation of the film’s plot and voiced all the roles that appeared on screen. The benshi for moving pictures were phased out with the advent of sound films.</p>
<p>Spectral Voices</p>
<p>1➥ According to Japanese folklore, echoes are the voices of tree spirits.</p>
<p>2➥ A more contemporary interpretation of echoes (kodama) as the spirits of a mountain forest appears in Miyazaki Hayao’s animated film Princess Mononoke (1997).</p>
<p>3➥ A form of musical and/or vocal performance popularized in the Manji and Kanbun (1658–1673) periods of the Tokugawa era.</p>
<p>A Passion for Lenses</p>
<p>1➥ See the Translator’s Introduction.</p>
<p>2➥ Available in English translation in the collection Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination (Rutland, Vermont & Tokyo: Tuttle, 1956).</p>
<p>The Phantom Lord</p>
<p>1➥ Tsukioka Yoshitoshi (1839–1892), also known as Taisō, was a highly versatile ukiyo-e artist active from the late Edo to mid-Meiji period. He produced a quantity of ultra-violent, blood-splattered, and erotic works, which arguably laid the groundwork for many of the conventions found in the gekiga genre of later Japanese cartoon art.</p>
<p>2➥ In a handwritten, self-published book entitled Strange Tales (Kidan), Rampo wrote an essay in English with the title “Poe’s Influence” in which he quoted his namesake: </p>
<p>The real things of the world would affect me like visions, and only so; while the wild ideas of the land of dreams became in turn not only the feeding ground of my daily existence, but positively the sole and entire existence itself.</p>
<p>(From the opening section of Poe’s story “Berenice.” A facsimile of this page of Rampo’s essay appears in  Suzuki, p. 15.)</p>
<p>3➥ English translation from The Landlady, trans. David McDuff. New York: Penguin Books, 1988.</p>
<p>4➥ Sazanami Sanjin (pen name of Iwaya Sazanami, 1870–1933) was the editor of Shōnen Sekai. He published numerous collections of fairy tales, including both Japanese tales and adaptations of foreign sources. He was an author of popular fiction, and one of the pioneers of the genre of juvenile fiction in Japan.</p>
<p>5➥ The type sizes developed in the Meiji period were based on a nine-step scale, with #1 type being the largest and #9 the smallest. The standard size for book printing was #5 type (10.5 points in today’s terms), so #4 type was a bit larger than average.</p>
<p>My Love for the Printed Word</p>
<p>1➥ Sazanami Sanjin (pen name of Iwaya Sazanami, 1870–1933) was the editor of Shōnen Sekai. He published numerous collections of fairy tales, including both Japanese tales and adaptations of foreign sources. He was an author of popular fiction, and one of the pioneers of the genre of juvenile fiction in Japan.</p>
<p>2➥ An industrial variety of paper so named because of a chrysanthemum-shaped stamp it had when first introduced to Japan.</p>
<p>3➥ Ming type (minchō in Japanese), introduced in the Meiji period, is the Japanese equivalent of serifed type, and remains one of the two most commonly used type styles in Japan today. Unlike minchō, Ching type (shinchō) retains many qualities of formal brush-written calligraphy.</p>
<p>4➥ Yoneryū is an abbreviation of Yonezawa Ryūkyū tsumugi, and refers to a kind of fabric. Hakama are long pleated trousers worn in accompaniment to a kimono.</p>
<p>5➥ Shōnen Sekai, Nihon Shōnen, and Shōnen, respectively.</p>
<p>6➥ Adventure World (Bōken Sekai) and World of Bravery (Bukyō Sekai) were magazines for adolescents and teenagers strongly flavored by heroic exploits, patriotism and pride in the Japanese empire. The latter was particularly jingoistic and pro-imperialist.</p>
<p>7➥ The title is a direct translation from the Japanese original, Risshin hizakurige. Risshin shusse, or “social advancement,” was a popular byword of the Meiji era, while hizakurige, or “on shank’s mare” (to go on foot), borrows from the title of a popular Edo fiction written by Jippensha Ikku (1765–1831) and re-adapted in early Meiji by Kanagaki Robun (1829–1894).</p>
<p>8➥ The magazine Taiyō, published by Hakubunkan.</p>
<p>9➥ Rampo is referring to hyōshigi, square wooden blocks clapped together at dramatic moments in theatrical performances such as kabuki.</p>
<p>10➥ A shrine in the Bunkyō ward of Tokyo dedicated to Sugawara no Michizane, the patron deity of writing and calligraphy.</p>
<p>11➥ This refers to a hand-operated foot press, also called a tekin: a small manual press for printing single sheets at a time.</p>
<p>12➥ A kind of bedbug.</p>
<p>13➥ The Kenseikai (Constitutional Government Party) was founded in 1916, only to be dissolved in 1927 when it merged with another political faction to form the Minsei Party (Civil Government Party). The Minsei Party in turn dissolved in 1940. </p>
<p>Confessions of Rampo</p>
<p>1➥ An illegal establishment that maintains the storefront appearance of a restaurant or other business. </p>
<p>2➥ It was the custom in Japan for babies to be considered a year old at birth. Technically additional years were not counted on one’s birthday, but on New Year’s Day.</p>
<p>3➥ The term chigo-san, translated here as “milksop,” refers to the subordinate position of the younger man in the nanshoku (male-male) relationships of pre-Meiji Japan. Homosexual relationships of this sort between older and younger boys remained customary in Meiji schools. Similar experiences are represented in Mori Ogai’s memoir-like novella Vita Sexualis, which was published in 1909, but looks back to the early days of Meiji (English translation by Kazuji Ninomiya and Sanford Goldstein. Rutland, Vermont, & Tokyo: Tuttle, 1972).</p>
<p>4➥ This essay was first published as a column in the magazine Taishū Bungei.</p>
<p>Fingerprint Novels of the Meiji Era</p>
<p>1➥ Ellery Queen’s Mystery Magazine ( EQMM) has been in publication since 1941.</p>
<p>2➥ Ellery Queen, Queen’s Quorum (Boston: Little Brown, 1951), pp. 77–78. </p>
<p>3➥ Ellery Queen, Queen’s Quorum (Boston: Little Brown, 1951), pp. 44–45. </p>
<p>4➥ Although he sometimes represented himself as having been born in England, Henry James Black (1858–1923) was the Australian-born son of a Yokohama-based English newspaperman named John Reddie Black (1827–1880). Henry Black grew up in Japan and became a professional storyteller and orator in the late 1870s, often adapting Western novels, tales and political events into rakugo (comedy, sentimental tales, and ghost stories) and kōdan (historical narratives and war tales) to entertain Japanese audiences. He adopted the stage name Kairakutei Black (“Pleasure Pavilion” Black) upon his acceptance into the illustrious Sanyūha school of performers. He should not be confused with the off-color contemporary rakugoka Fukuda Hidefumi, who uses “Kairakutei Black” as a stage and pen name.</p>
<p>5➥ Furuhata Tanemoto (1891–1975), a leading forensic scientist and pioneering researcher into the classification of the ABO blood types. </p>
<p>6➥ Galton did not publish his classification system until 1888.</p>
<p>7➥ Edward Henry did not serve on this committee, known as the Belper Committee, but was an expert who spoke before it in support of using fingerprints for criminal investigations. The Belper Committee adopted his method of fingerprint classification and he was appointed Assistant Commissioner of Scotland Yard in 1901. He was appointed Commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police in 1903. </p>
<p>8➥ Likewise in “The Adventure of the Norwood Builder,” Holmes does not crack the case using fingerprints, but by discovering a secret room in which the purported victim of the crime is hiding. It is Holmes’ rival, Inspector Lestrade of Scotland Yard, who (incorrectly) points to the fingerprint on the wall as irrefutable evidence of the accused murderer’s guilt.</p>
<p>9➥ The stories in The Return of Sherlock Holmes were published in The Strand Magazine from October 1903 to December 1904.</p>
<p>10➥ Furuhata gives two names for the thumbprint, tsume-in and boin. The term for palm-print (tegata), meanwhile, in contemporary parlance has come to mean a bill or draft that is signed, not stamped with a hand print. </p>
<p>11➥ As Rampo notes in the essay “My Love for the Printed Word,” Kuroiwa Ruikō was a popular writer of serial fiction in the Meiji period, and his adaptations of Western literature are regarded as marking the onset of detective fiction in Japan. The practice of adapting Western themes, locations and character names into Japanese was by no means limited to Ruikō, however. For further reading, see J. Scott Miller’s Adaptations of Western Literature in Meiji Japan (Palgrave, 2001).</p>
<p>12➥ Rampo’s note: As per the original. No matter how gifted a Japanese speaker Black was, he was still a foreigner and sometimes left out crucial parts of speech. The shorthand transcribers at the time were extremely faithful in capturing these details.</p>
<p>13➥ Rampo’s note: This refers to the whorls of the fingerprint.</p>
<p>14➥ Rampo’s note: The lawyer’s name.</p>
<p>15➥ At the time of printing we had been unable to locate an authoritative romanization for this name, which various sources give as ジョンペール or ジョンベール.</p>
<p>16➥ Kōbunsha’s Edogawa Rampo zenshū notes that two additional works by Black were found in Rampo’s personal library. The first is A Single-Minded Crime (Setsunaru tsumi), transcribed by Imamura Jirō and published by Ginkadō in October 1896 on chrysanthemum paper (234 pages). The second is the true-crime story Kanda Taketarō, transcribed by Imamura and published by Kamiya Yokichi in 1901, also on chrysanthemum paper (191 pages). Lastly, it mentions scholar Itō Hideo’s clam in Meiji no tantei shōsetsu (The Meiji Detective Novel, Tokyo: Sōhō Bunko, 2003) that the source-text for The Orphan was Dickens’ Oliver Twist.</p>
<p>Dickens and Poe</p>
<p>1➥ This refers to the anti-Catholic rioting that followed after Lord Gordon led a mob to the Houses of Parliament to present a petition against the Catholic Relief Act of 1778. The rioting lasted for eight days, and resulted in over three hundred deaths and extensive property damage around London. The period Rampo mentions (“from 1779 to 1780”) encompasses the campaign Lord Gordon led against Catholic civil rights, which culminated in the 1780 riot.</p>
<p>2➥ In the crucial passage from his original exposé (which is repeated in the later review), Poe explains:</p>
<p>That Barnaby Rudge is the son of the murderer may not appear evident to our readers – but we will explain. The person murdered is Mr. Reuben Haredale. He was found assassinated in his bedchamber. His steward (Mr. Rudge, senior,) and his gardener (name not mentioned) are missing. At first both are suspected. “Some months afterward” – here we use the words of the story – “the steward’s body, scarcely to be recognized but by his clothes, and the watch and the ring he wore – was found at the bottom of a piece of water in the grounds, with a deep gash in the breast, where he had been stabbed by a knife. He was only partly dressed; and all people agreed that he had been sitting up reading in his own room where there were many traces of blood, and was suddenly fallen upon and killed, before his master.”</p>
<p>Now, be it observed, it is not the author himself who asserts that the steward’s body was found; he has put the words in the mouth of one of his characters. His design is to make it appear, in the denouement, that the steward, Rudge, first murdered the gardener, then went to his master’s chamber, murdered him, was interrupted by his (Rudge’s) wife, whom he seized and held by the wrist, to prevent her giving the alarm –  that he then, after possessing himself of the booty desired, returned to the gardener’s room, exchanged clothes with him, put upon the corpse his own watch and ring, and secreted it where it was afterwards discovered at so late a period that the features could not be identified. </p>
<p>(As reprinted in the New York Times, June 1, 1913.)</p>
<p>An Eccentric Idea</p>
<p>1➥ Thomas W. Hanshew (1857–1914), “The Lion’s Smile” (1910). Hanshew was actually an American writer. Torimonochō is a kind of detective story featuring a Tokugawa period police detective. The genre dates back to the Tokugawa period itself, and remains popular today.</p>
<p>2➥ This plot, based on a story by an unidentified French author, was introduced in an essay by A.K. (Anna Katherine) Green (1846–1935) that was published in Japanese translation in Shin seinen magazine in 1922. For this point and much of the information on Rampo’s sources for this essay, I am indebted to the editors of the Kōbunsha Edogawa Rampo zenshū (volume 23, pp. 662–665). </p>
<p>3➥ Melville Davisson Post (1871–1930), “The Doomdorf Murder” (1914) and Maurice Leblanc (1864–1941), “Le carafe d’eau” (1923). Rampo’s story “Hinawajū” (The Matchlock) was written in about 1915.</p>
<p>4➥ This story by Robert Winton (dates unknown) was published in Japanese translation in Shin seinen in 1922.</p>
<p>5➥ John Dickson Carr (1906–1977), “The Crime in Nobody’s Room” (1938), and Ellery Queen (Frederic Dannay [1905–1982] and Manfred B. Lee [1905–1971]), The Lamp of God (1935).</p>
<p>6➥ Victor L. Whitechurch (1868–1933), “Sir Gilbert Murrell’s Picture” (1912).</p>
<p>7➥ “The Story of the Lost Special” (1898).</p>
<p>8➥ Leonard R. Gribble (1908–1985), “The Case of Jacob Heylyn” (included in E.C. Bentley’s anthology A Second Century of Detective Stories, 1938).</p>
<p>9➥ “Error at Daybreak” (1936).</p>
<p>10➥ Freeman Wills Crofts (1879–1957), Man Overboard! (1936).</p>
<p>11➥ Kosakai Fuboku (1890–1929), “Setsujinron” (On Murder), published in Shin seinen in 1923. The plant in question is an agave, and the fiber is sisal hemp.</p>
<p>A Desire for Transformation</p>
<p>1➥ First published in 1925 in the magazine Kuraku. An English translation is available in Japanese Tales of Mystery and Imagination (Rutland, Vermont & Tokyo: Tuttle, 1956).</p>
<p>2➥ The French writer Marcel Aymé (1902–1967) wrote novels, stories, tales, and plays. His work combines elements of fantasy and satire.</p>
<p>3➥ Rampo is referring to Aymé’s novel La belle image, published by Gallimard in 1941, not 1951. The English translation by Norman Denny was originally published in 1951 as The Second Face, and later reissued as The Grand Seduction.</p>
<p>4➥ “La grâce,” originally published in the collection Le Vin de Paris (Paris: Gallimard, 1947). Rampo is probably referring to Norman Denny’s translation “The State of Grace,” which was published in Across Paris and other stories (New York: Harper, 1950).</p>
<p>5➥ The President’s Mystery Story (1935) grew out of a challenge issued by Franklin D. Roosevelt at a White House lunch: how could a millionaire disappear and start a new life? The editor Fulton Oursler (1893–1952), who published mystery novels under the pen name Anthony Abbott, took up the challenge. The resulting book was a collaboration between Oursler and five other leading mystery writers, with Roosevelt himself listed as a co-author when the book was published.</p>
<p>Contributors</p>
<p> </p>
<p>Seth Jacobowitz is an Assistant Professor of East Asian Languages and Literatures at Yale University, specializing in Japanese literature and visual culture. He received his B.A. in English literature from Columbia University, and his M.A. in Asian Studies and Ph.D. in East Asian Literature from Cornell University. He was a Fulbright Fellow to Nagoya University, a Japan Foundation Fellow at Waseda University, and a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Reischauer Institute of Japanese Studies at Harvard University. He received his B.A. in English literature from Columbia University, and his M.A. in Asian Studies and Ph.D. in East Asian Literature from Cornell University. He was a Fulbright Fellow to Nagoya University (1996–97), a Japan Foundation Fellow at Waseda University (2000–01), and a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Reischauer Institute of Japanese Studies at Harvard University (2006–07).</p>
<p>Tatsumi Takayuki, Ph.D., is professor of English at Keio University, president of the Tokyo Chapter of the American Literature Society of Japan (2005–09) and vice-president of the Poe Society of Japan, and editor of the Journal of Transnational American Studies (2008). He has taught American literature and literary theory at Keio University since 1989. He won major awards with the following books: Cyberpunk America (1988; the winner of the 1988 American Studies Book Prize [Japan-U.S. Friendship Commission]); New Americanist Poetics (1995; the 1995 Yukichi Fukuzawa Award [Keio University]); Japanese SF Controversies: 1957–1997 ([ed.] 2000; the 21st Japan SF Award [SFWJ]). Co-editor of the New Japanese Fiction issue of Review of Contemporary Fiction (22.2 [Summer 2002]), he has published a variety of essays in PMLA, Critique, Para*Doxa, Extrapolation, American Book Review, SF Eye, Mechademia, and elsewhere on subjects ranging from American Renaissance to post-cyberpunk fiction and film. His recent works include Full Metal Apache: Transactions between Cyberpunk Japan and Avant-Pop America (Duke University Press, 2006) and Robot Ghosts and Wired Dreams: Japanese Science Fiction from Origins to Anime (co-edited with  Christopher Bolton, Jr. and Istvan Cscicery-Ronay; University of Minnesota Press, 2007). </p>
<p>Copyright information </p>
<p>This edition © 2008, 2015 Kurodahan Press</p>
<p>This ebook is licensed for your personal enjoyment only. It may not be sold or used in any way in any other work or product without explicit advance written permission from Kurodahan Press. Thank you for helping to protect the contributors’ rights.</p>
<p>Stories and essays © Hirai Ryūtarō</p>
<p>English translations © 2008 Seth Jacobowitz</p>
<p>All rights reserved.</p>
<p>ISBN: 978-4-902075-57-1</p>
<p>Version 1.0</p>
<p>Kurodahan  Press Division of　Intercom Ltd.</p>
<p>#403 Tenjin 3-9-10, Chuo-ku, Fukuoka 810-0001 Japan</p>
<p>http://www.kurodahan.com</p>
